The Legend of Zelda
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the video game series. For the video game, see The Legend of Zelda (video game). For other uses, see The Legend of Zelda (disambiguation).
The Legend of Zelda
The current logo of the series, first appearing in A Link to the PastGenresAction-adventureDevelopers* Nintendo
* Capcom
* Vanpool
* GrezzoPublishersNintendoCreators* Shigeru Miyamoto
* Takashi TezukaComposersKoji KondoPlatformsPlatforms[show]Platform of originNintendo Entertainment System (Family Computer Disk System)First releaseThe Legend of Zelda
February 21, 1986Latest releaseThe Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD
March 4, 2016The Legend of Zelda (Japanese: ?????? Hepburn: Zeruda no Densetsu?) is a high-fantasy action-adventurevideo game series created by Japanese game designers Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka. It is primarily developed and published by Nintendo, although some portable installments have been outsourced to Capcom, Vanpool, and Grezzo. The series' gameplay incorporates elements of action, adventure, and puzzle-solving games. The Legend of Zelda is one of Nintendo's most prominent franchises.
The series centers on Link, the playable character and chief protagonist. Link is often given the task of rescuing Princess Zelda and the kingdom of Hyrule from Ganon, who is the principal antagonist of the series; however, other settings and antagonists have appeared in several titles. The games' plots commonly involve a relic known as the Triforce, a set of three omnipotent golden triangles. The protagonist in each game is usually not the same incarnation of Link, but a few exceptions exist.
Since the original The Legend of Zelda was released in 1986, the series has expanded to include 18 entries on all of Nintendo's major game consoles, as well as a number of spin-offs. An American animated TV series based on the games aired in 1989 and individual manga adaptations commissioned by Nintendo have been produced in Japan since 1997. As of 2011, the series has sold over 62 million copies.
Contents
  [hide] 
* 1Overview
o 1.1Gameplay
o 1.2Audio
o 1.3Inspiration
* 2Setting
o 2.1Fictional chronology
* 3Characters
o 3.1Link
o 3.2Princess Zelda
o 3.3Ganondorf
* 4History
o 4.11980s
o 4.21990s
o 4.32000s
o 4.42010s
* 5Other games
o 5.1CD-i games
o 5.2LCD games
o 5.3Cancelled games
o 5.4Spin-off games
o 5.5Cameos
* 6Reception and legacy
o 6.1Impact
* 7Other media
o 7.1TV series
o 7.2Print media
o 7.3Music
o 7.4Potential films
o 7.5Monopoly
* 8References
* 9External links
Overview[edit]
Gameplay[edit]
The Legend of Zelda games feature a mixture of puzzles, action, adventure/battle gameplay, and exploration. These elements have remained constant throughout the series, but with refinements and additions featured in each new game. Later games in the series also include stealth gameplay, where the player must avoid enemies while proceeding through a level, as well as racing elements. Although the games can be beaten with a minimal amount of exploration and side quests, the player is frequently rewarded with helpful items or increased abilities for solving puzzles or exploring hidden areas. Some items are consistent and appear many times throughout the series (such as bombs and bomb flowers, which can be used both as weapons and to open blocked or hidden doorways; boomerangs, which can kill or paralyze enemies; keys for locked doors; magic swords, shields, and bows and arrows), while others are unique to a single game. Though the games contain many role-playing elements (Zelda II: The Adventure of Link is the only one to include an experience system), they emphasize straightforward hack and slash-style combat over the strategic, turn-based or active time combat of games like Final Fantasy. The game's role-playing elements, however, have led to much debate over whether or not the Zelda games should be classified as action role-playing games, a genre on which the series has had a strong influence.[1]
Every game in the main Zelda series has consisted of three principal areas: an overworld in which movement is multidirectional, allowing the player some degree of freedom of action; areas of interaction with other characters (merely caves or hidden rooms in the first game, but expanding to entire towns and cities in subsequent games) in which the player gains special items or advice; and dungeons, areas of labyrinthine layout, usually underground, comprising a wide range of difficult enemies, bosses, and items. Each dungeon usually has one major item inside, which is usually essential for solving many of the puzzles within that dungeon and often plays a crucial role in defeating that dungeon's boss, as well as progressing through the game. In nearly every Zelda game, navigating a dungeon is aided by locating a map, which reveals its layout, and a magic compass, which reveals the location of significant and smaller items such as keys and equipment. In later games, the series includes a special "big key" that would unlock the door to battle the dungeon's boss enemy and open the item chest.
In most Zelda games, the player's life meter is represented as a line of hearts. The life meter is replenished a number of different ways, including picking up hearts left by some defeated enemies, fairies or springs located in specific locations, or using an item such as a potion. Most games feature "heart containers" as the prize for defeating the final boss of a dungeon and "pieces of heart" for completing certain side quests or found in hidden chests; heart containers extend the life meter by one heart, and receiving a varied number of pieces of heart (On average four pieces) do the same as a heart container. Both will completely replenish Link's health.
The games pioneered a number of features that were to become industry standards. The original Legend of Zelda was the first console game with a save function that enabled players to stop playing and then resume later. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time introduced a targeting system that simplified 3D combat.
Audio[edit]

Koji Kondo, the series' sound director, in 2007
Games in The Legend of Zelda series frequently feature in-game musical instruments, particularly in musical puzzles, which are widespread.[2] Often, instruments trigger game events: for example, the recorder in The Legend of Zelda can reveal secret areas, as well as warp Link to the Dungeon entrances. This warping with music feature has also been used in A Link to the Past and Link's Awakening. In Ocarina of Time, playing instruments is a core part of the game, the player needing to play the instrument through the use of the game controller to succeed.[3] Ocarina of Time is "[one of the] first contemporary non-dance title[s] to feature music-making as part of its gameplay",[4] using music as a heuristic device and requiring the player to utilise songs to progress in the game[5] – a game mechanic that is also present in Majora's Mask.[6]
"The Legend of Zelda Theme" is a recurring piece of music that was created for the first game of the franchise. The composer and sound director of the series, Koji Kondo, initially planned to use Maurice Ravel's Boléro as the game's title theme, but was forced to change it when he learned, late in the game's development cycle, that the copyright for the orchestral piece had not yet expired. As a result, Kondo wrote a new arrangement of the overworld theme within one day.[7] The "Zelda Theme" has topped ScrewAttack's "Top Ten Videogame Themes Ever" list.[8]
Up until Breath of the Wild, the Legend of Zelda series avoided using voice acting in speaking roles, relying instead on written dialogue. Series producer Eiji Aonuma previously stated that as Link is entirely mute, having the other characters speak while Link remains silent "would be off-putting".[9] Also in Breath of the Wild, there will be a different approach to music in that there will be no "theme music" for different locations. Instead, the main sounds will be natural ambience around the player, in addition to some minimalist piano music.[10]
Inspiration[edit]
The Legend of Zelda was principally inspired by Shigeru Miyamoto's "explorations" as a young boy in the hillsides, forests, and caves surrounding his childhood home in Sonobe, Japan where he ventured into forests with secluded lakes, caves, and rural villages. According to Miyamoto, one of his most memorable experiences was the discovery of a cave entrance in the middle of the woods. After some hesitation, he apprehensively entered the cave, and explored its depths with the aid of a lantern. Miyamoto has referred to the creation of the Zelda games as an attempt to bring to life a "miniature garden" for players to play with in each game of the series.[11]
Hearing of American novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald's wife Zelda, Miyamoto thought the name sounded "pleasant and significant".[12] Paying tribute, he chose to name the princess after her, and titled it The Legend of Zelda.
Link and the fairy were inspired by Peter Pan and Tinker Bell.[13][14]
The Master Sword was inspired by the Arthurian legend, first mentioned in Welsh mythology; Mabinogion as; 'Caledfwlch' Excalibur.[15][16] The similarities lay with the swords being kept in stone until the chosen one 'hero' takes it out to save the land.
Setting[edit]

The Legend of Zelda on the NES
Main article: Universe of The Legend of Zelda
The Legend of Zelda takes place predominantly in a medieval Western Europe inspired fantasy land called Hyrule, which has developed a deep history and wide geography over the series' many releases. Much of the backstory of the creation of Hyrule was revealed in the games A Link to the Past, Ocarina of Time, The Wind Waker, Twilight Princess, Skyward Sword, and A Link Between Worlds. Hyrule's principal inhabitants are pointy-eared humanoids called Hylians, which include the player character, Link, and the eponymous princess, Zelda.
According to the in-game backstories, the world of Hyrule was created by the three golden goddesses: Din, Farore and Nayru.[17] Before departing, the goddesses left a sacred artifact called the Triforce, which could grant the wishes of the user. It consisted of three golden triangles that each embodies one of the goddesses' virtues: Power, Courage and Wisdom.[18]However, because the Triforce had no will of its own because it was an item,[19] it could not judge between good and evil, and so would grant any wish indiscriminately.[20][21] Because of this, it was placed within an alternate world called the "Sacred Realm" or the "Golden Land" until one worthy of its power could obtain it. The Sacred Realm can itself be affected by the heart of those who use the Triforce: those who are pure will make it a paradise, while those who are evil will transform it into a dark realm.[22]
In Skyward Sword, the Triforce was sought by a demon king named Demise,[23] and after a long battle, Demise was sealed away within the Temple of the goddess Hylia, guardian of the Triforce.[18][24] Hylia, placing the Hylians on a floating island (called Skyloft) in the sky to protect them, orchestrated a means to stop the demon from escaping: creating the Goddess Sword (later becoming the Master Sword) for her chosen hero[25] and discarding her divinity to be reborn among the people of Skyloft.[26] In time, Zelda and Link (the reborn Hylia and her predestined warrior), enacted the goddess' plan and Demise was destroyed. However, Demise vowed that his rage would be reborn and forever plague those descended from Link and Zelda.[27] That prophecy came to fruition in Ocarina of Time, when Ganondorf's attempt to get the Triforce scattered it with him gaining the Triforce of Power. The Triforce of Wisdom ended up with the Hylian princesses descended from Zelda, each named after her, while the Triforce of Courage is passed to a youth named Link across generations. While the Triforces of Power and Wisdom have been part of the series since the original The Legend of Zelda, it was only in Zelda II: The Adventure of Link that the Triforce of Courage was first introduced, being obtained by Link at the end of his quest. The Triforce, or even a piece of it, is not always distributed as a whole. Such as in The Wind Waker, Link must find all the pieces (called Triforce Shards) of the Triforce of Courage before he can return to Hyrule. Even in the original The Legend of Zelda, Zelda breaks her Triforce of Wisdom into 8 pieces for Link to find, before she was captured by Ganon.
The fictional universe established by the Zelda games sets the stage for each adventure. Some games take place in different lands with their own back-stories. Termina and Lorule serve as parallel worlds to Hyrule,[28] Hytopia is a connected kingdom,[29] and Koholint is an island far away from Hyrule that appears to be part of a dream.[30]
Fictional chronology[edit]
The Legend of Zelda series chronology* Skyward Sword
* The Minish Cap
* Four Swords
* Ocarina of TimeThe Decline of HyruleThe Twilight RealmA New World* A Link to the Past
* Oracle of Seasons & Ages
* Link's Awakening
* A Link Between Worlds
* Tri Force Heroes
* The Legend of Zelda
* The Adventure of Link* Majora's Mask
* Twilight Princess
* Four Swords Adventures* The Wind Waker
* Phantom Hourglass
* Spirit TracksThe chronology of the Legend of Zelda series was subject of much debate among fans until an official timeline was released on December 21, 2011, within the collector's book Hyrule Historia, which was originally exclusive to Japan and was later released in the United States.[31][32] Prior to its release, producers confirmed the existence of a confidential document, which connected all the games.[33][34] Certain materials and developer statements once partially established an official timeline of the released installments. Zelda II: The Adventure of Link is a direct sequel to the original The Legend of Zelda, and takes place several years later.[35][36] The third game, A Link to the Past, is a prequel to the first two titles,[37][38][39] and is directly followed by Link's Awakening.[40][41]Ocarina of Time is a prequel that takes the story many centuries back; according to character designer Satoru Takizawa, it was meant to implicitly tell the Imprisoning War from the manual of A Link to the Past, with Majora's Mask directly following its ending.[42][43] Skyward Sword is then a prequel to Ocarina of Time.[44] Twilight Princess is set more than 100 years after Ocarina of Time.[45][46]
The Wind Waker is parallel, and takes place in the other timeline branch, more than a century after the adult era of Ocarina of Time.[45][46] Phantom Hourglass is a continuation of the story from The Wind Waker,[47] and is followed by Spirit Tracks, which is set about 100 years later on a supercontinent far away from the setting of The Wind Waker.[48] At the time of its release, Four Swords for the Game Boy Advance was considered the oldest tale in the series' chronology, with Four Swords Adventures set sometime after its events.[49] The Minish Cap precedes the two games, telling of the origins of villain Vaati and the creation of the Four Sword.[50] A Link Between Worlds takes place six generations after Link to the Past. Important events that occur in the game include the Triforce being reunited, and Ganon being resurrected.[51]
Nintendo's 2011 timeline announcement subsequently posits that following Ocarina of Time, the timeline splits into three alternate routes: in one, Link fails to defeat Ganon, leading into A Link to the Past, Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages, Link's Awakening, The Legend of Zelda and The Adventure of Link. In the second and third, Link is successful, leading to a timeline split between his childhood (when Zelda sends him back in time to tell the Zelda in the past of the horrifying fate of Hyrule) and adulthood (where the Zelda from the future lives on to try and rebuild the kingdom). His childhood continues with Majora's Mask, followed by Twilight Princess and Four Swords Adventures. The timeline from his adult life continues into Wind Waker, Phantom Hourglass and Spirit Tracks.
In the early 2000s, Nintendo of America released a timeline on the official website of the series, which interpreted all stories up to the Oracle games as the adventures of a single protagonist named Link.[52] At one point, translator Dan Owsen and his coworkers at Nintendo of America had conceived another complete timeline and intended to make it available online. However, the Japanese series developers rejected the idea so the timeline would be kept open to the imagination of the players.[53]
Characters[edit]
See also: Characters in The Legend of Zelda series
Link[edit]
Main article: Link (The Legend of Zelda)
The central protagonist of the The Legend of Zelda series, Link is the name of various young men who characteristically wear a green tunic and a pointed cap. In most games, the player can give Link a different name before the start of the adventure, and he will be referred by that given name throughout by the non-player characters (NPCs). The various Links each have a special title, such as "Hero of Time", "Hero of the Winds" or "Hero chosen by the gods". Link is left-handed, with two exceptions. In the Wii version of Twilight Princess, Link is right-handed due to the "mirroring" used to accommodate the right-handed control scheme,[54] which flips the entire game world's layout from that of its GameCube counterpart. Link is right-handed in the title Skyward Sword for the same reason. In the manual for the original game, he is depicted as being right-handed, and in the game itself, Link is seen as ambidextrous because whether he is facing left or right, his sword is in the "down screen side". Like many silent protagonists in video games, Link does not speak, only producing grunts, yells, or similar sounds. Despite the player not seeing the dialogue, it is referenced second-hand by in-game characters, showing that he is not, in fact, mute. Link is shown as a silent protagonist so that the audience is able to have their own thoughts as to how their Link would answer the characters instead of him having scripted responses.
Princess Zelda[edit]
Main article: Princess Zelda
Princess Zelda is the princess of Hyrule and the guardian of the Triforce of Wisdom. Her name is present in many of her female ancestors and descendants. While most titles require Link to save Zelda from Ganon, she sometimes plays a supporting role in battle, using magical powers and weapons such as Light Arrows to aid Link. With the exception of the CD-i games (which were not official Nintendo games), she was not playable in the main series until Spirit Tracks, where she becomes a spirit and can possess a Phantom Knight that can be controlled by the player. Zelda appears under various other aliases and alter egos, including Sheik (in Ocarina of Time) and Tetra (in The Wind Waker and Phantom Hourglass). In Skyward Sword, it is revealed that the Zelda of that game is a reincarnation of the goddess Hylia, whose power flows through the royal bloodline. Shigeru Miyamoto used the name "Zelda" from American novelist Zelda Fitzgerald.
Ganondorf[edit]
Main article: Ganon
Ganon, also known as Ganondorf in his humanoid form, is the main antagonist and the final boss in the majority of Zelda games. In the series, Ganondorf is the leader of a race of desert brigands called the Gerudo, which consists entirely of female warriors save for one man born every one hundred years. He is significantly taller than other human NPCs, but his looks vary between games, often taking the form of a monstrous anthropomorphic boar. His specific motives vary from game to game, but most often his plans include him kidnapping Princess Zelda and planning to achieve domination of Hyrule and presumably the world beyond it. To this end, he seeks the Triforce, a powerful magical relic. He often possesses a portion of the Triforce called the Triforce of Power, which gives him great strength. However, it is often not enough to accomplish his ends, leading him to hunt the remaining Triforce pieces. Unlike Link, Zelda, and most other recurring characters, he is actually the same person in every game, with the exception of Four Swords Adventures, where he is a reincarnation of the original. In each game the battles with him are different and he fights using different styles. The game Skyward Sword indicates that Ganon is a reincarnation of an evil deity known as Demise.
History[edit]
Timeline of release years1986The Legend of Zelda1987The Adventure of Link1988198919901991A Link to the Past19921993Link's Awakening19941995199619971998Ocarina of Time19992000Majora's Mask2001Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages2002Four SwordsThe Wind Waker20032004Four Swords AdventuresThe Minish Cap20052006Twilight Princess2007Phantom Hourglass20082009Spirit Tracks20102011Skyward Sword20122013A Link Between Worlds20142015Tri Force Heroes20162017Breath of the Wild1980s[edit]

The first Legend of Zelda game appeared on the Famicom Disk Systemin 1986. It was later converted into a cartridge game for the American NES.
The Legend of Zelda, the first game of the series, was first released in Japan on February 21, 1986, on the Famicom Disk System.[55] A cartridge version, using battery-backed memory, was released in the United States on August 22, 1987, and Europe on November 27, 1987. The game features a "Second Quest," accessible either upon completing the game, or by registering one's name as "ZELDA" when starting a new quest. The Second Quest features different dungeons and item placement, and more difficult enemies.[56]
The second game, Zelda II: The Adventure of Link, was released for the Famicom Disk System in Japan in January 14, 1987,[55] and for the Nintendo Entertainment System in Europe in November 1988 and North America in December 1988. The game exchanged the top-down perspective for side-scrolling (though the top-down point of view was retained for overworld areas), and introduced RPG elements (such as experience points) not used previously or thereafter in the series. The Legend of Zelda and Zelda II were released in gold-coloured cartridges instead of the console's regular grey cartridges. Both were re-released in the final years of the Nintendo Entertainment System with grey cartridges.
1990s[edit]
Four years later, The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past returned to the top-down view (under a 3/4 perspective), and added the concept of an alternate dimension, the Dark World. The game was released for the Super NES on November 21, 1991.[55] It was later re-released for the Game Boy Advance on March 14, 2003, in North America, on a cartridge with Four Swords,[55] the first multiplayer Zelda, and then through Nintendo's Virtual Console service on January 22, 2007. In addition, both this game (unchanged, except for being converted into a downloadable format)[57] and an exclusive "loosely based" sequel (which used the same game engine) called BS Zelda no Densetsu Inishie no Sekiban[58] were released on the Satellaview in Japan on March 2, 1997, and March 30, 1997, respectively.
In 1994, near the end of the Famicom's lifespan, the original Famicom game was re-released in cartridge format.[59] A modified version, BS Zelda no Densetsu, was released for the Super Famicom's satellite-based expansion, Satellaview, on August 6, 1995, in Japan. A second Satellaview title, BS Zelda no Densetsu MAP2 was released for the Satellaview on December 30, 1995. Both titles featured rearranged dungeons, an altered overworld, and new voice-acted plot-lines.[60]
The next game, Link's Awakening, is the first Zelda for Nintendo's Game Boy handheld, and the first set outside Hyrule and to exclude Princess Zelda. It was released in 1993, and re-released, in full color, as a launch title for the Game Boy Color in 1998 as Link's Awakening DX. This re-release features additions such as an extra color-based dungeon and a photo shop that allows interaction with the Game Boy Printer.

Ocarina of Time, the first 3D-styled game of the franchise
After a five-year hiatus, the series made the transition to 3D with Ocarina of Time for the Nintendo 64, which was released in November 1998. This game, initially known as Zelda 64, retains the core gameplay of the previous 2D games, and was very successful commercially and critically. It ranks highly on IGN and EGM's "greatest games of all time" lists, and scored perfect scores in several video game publications.[61] In February 2006, it was ranked by Nintendo Power as the best game released for a Nintendo console.[62] The game was originally developed for the poorly selling, Japanese-only Nintendo 64DD, but was ported to cartridge format when the 64DD hardware was delayed.[63] A new gameplay mechanic, lock-on targeting (called "Z-targeting" as that is the controller button used), is used in the game, which focuses the camera on a nearby target and alters the player's actions relative to that target.[64] Such mechanics allow precise sword fighting in a 3D space. The game heavily uses context-sensitive button play, which enabled the player to control various actions with Link using only one button on the Nintendo 64's game pad. Each action was handled slightly differently but all used the 'A' button to perform. For instance, standing next to a block and pressing 'A' made Link grab it (enabling him to push/pull it), but moving forwards into a block and pressing 'A' allowed Link to climb the block. The 'B' button was used only as an attack button. The game featured the first appearance of Link's horse, Epona, allowing Link to travel quickly across land and fire arrows from horseback. Those who preordered the game received a gold-coloured cartridge in a limited edition box with a golden plastic card affixed, reading "Collector's Edition".[65] In some stores that had this "Collector's Edition" quickly sold out, a small and rare Zelda pin was given instead. It is the sword and shield emblem with "Zelda" written on it. Very few of them are known to remain.
Ocarina of Time was re-released on the GameCube in 2002, when it was offered as a pre-order incentive for The Wind Waker in the U.S., Canada and Japan.[66]Europe continued to receive it free in every copy of The Wind Waker, except for the discounted Player's Choice version. It includes what is widely believed to be the remnants of a cancelled 64DD expansion for Ocarina of Time known as Ura Zelda in early development. Named Ocarina of Time Master Quest, the game was given the addition of revamped, more difficult dungeon layouts.[66] Ocarina of Time was included as part of Collector's Edition for the GameCube in 2003.[67] It is now available through the Wii's Virtual Console service.[68] In 2011, Nintendo released a new version of the game in stereoscopic 3D for the Nintendo 3DS titled The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D. In July 2015, Nintendo rereleased it for the Wii U Virtual Console.[69]
2000s[edit]
Ocarina of Time's follow-up, Majora's Mask, was released in April 2000. It uses the same 3D game engine as the previous game,[70] and added a time-based concept, in which Link, the protagonist, relives the events of three days as many times as needed to complete the game's objectives. It was originally called Zelda Gaiden,[71] a Japanese title that translates as Zelda Side story. Gameplay changed significantly; in addition to the time-limit, Link can use masks to transform into creatures with unique abilities. While Majora's Mask retains the graphical style of Ocarina of Time, it is also a departure, particularly in its atmosphere. It features motion-blur, unlike its predecessor. The game is darker,[70] dealing with death and tragedy in a manner not previously seen in the series, and has a sense of impending doom, as a large moon slowly descends upon the land of Termina to destroy all life. All copies of Majora's Mask are gold cartridges. A limited "Collector's Edition" lenticular cartridge label was offered as the pre-order incentive. Copies of the game that are not collector's editions feature a normal sticker cartridge label. Majora's Mask is included in the Collector's Edition,[67] and is available on the Virtual Console, as well as a 3D port for the portable 3DS console.
The next two games, Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages, were released simultaneously for the Game Boy Color, and interact using passwords[72] or a Game Link Cable.[73] After one game has been completed, the player is given a password that allows the other game to be played as a sequel.[72] They were developed by Flagship in conjunction with Nintendo, with supervision from Miyamoto. After the team experimented with porting the original The Legend of Zelda to the Game Boy Color, they decided to make an original trilogy[74] to be called the "Triforce Series".[75] When the password system linking the three games proved too troublesome, the concept was reduced to two games at Miyamoto's suggestion.[76] These two games became Oracle of Ages, which is more puzzle-based, and Oracle of Seasons, which is more action-oriented.[77]

The cel-shaded art style of The Wind Waker
When Nintendo revealed the GameCube on August 24, 2000, the day before Nintendo's SpaceWorld 2000 exposition,[78] a software demonstration showed a realistically styled real-time duel between Ganondorf and Link. Fans and the media speculated that the battle might be from a Zelda game in development.[79] At Spaceworld 2001, Nintendo showed a cel-shaded Zelda title, later released as The Wind Waker in December 2002. Due to poor reception, nothing further was shown until a playable demonstration was ready. Miyamoto felt The Wind Waker would "extend Zelda's reach to all ages".[80][81] The gameplay centres on controlling wind with a baton called the "Wind Waker" and sailing a small boat around an island-filled ocean, retaining similar gameplay mechanics as the previous 3D games in the series.
Following the release of The Wind Waker came The Legend of Zelda: Collector's Edition, which included the original The Legend of Zelda, Zelda II, Ocarina of Time, Majora's Mask, and a demo of The Wind Waker. GameSpot noted that Majora's Mask suffered from a frame rate which appeared choppier and inconsistencies in the audio.[82] This compilation was never sold commercially, and originally could only be obtained by purchasing a GameCube bundled with the disc,[83][84] (in North America, Europe and Australia), by registering a GameCube and two games at Nintendo.com,[83] or by subscribing or renewing a subscription to Nintendo Power (in North America) or Club Nintendo in Sweden.[83] In the UK, 1000 copies were made available through the Club Nintendo Stars Catalogue program.[84] After these were quickly claimed, Nintendo gave a copy to customers who mailed in proof of purchases from select GameCube games.[84]
The next game released in the series was Four Swords Adventures for the GameCube, which was released in early 2004 in Japan and America, and January 2005 in Europe. Based on the handheld Four Swords, Four Swords Adventures was another deviation from previous Zelda gameplay, focusing on level-based and multiplayer gameplay. The game contains 24 levels and a map screen; there is no connecting overworld. For multiplayer features, each player must use a Game Boy Advance system linked to the GameCube via a Nintendo GameCube Game Boy Advance cable. The game features a single-player campaign, in which using a Game Boy Advance is optional.
Four Swords Adventures includes two gameplay modes: "Hyrulean Adventure", with a plot and gameplay similar to other Zelda games, and "Shadow Battle", in which multiple Links, played by multiple players, battle each other. The Japanese and Korean versions include an exclusive third segment, "Navi Trackers" (originally designed as the stand-alone game "Tetra's Trackers"), which contains spoken dialogue for most of the characters, unlike other games in The Legend of Zelda series.
In November 2004 in Japan and Europe, and January 2005 in America, Nintendo released The Minish Cap for the Game Boy Advance. In The Minish Cap Link can shrink in size using a mystical, sentient hat named Ezlo. While shrunk, he can see previously explored parts of a dungeon from a different perspective, and enter areas through otherwise-impassable openings.

Promotional artwork for Twilight Princess
In November 2006, Twilight Princess was released as the first Zelda game on the Wii, and later, in December 2006, as the last official Nintendo game for the GameCube, the console for which it was originally developed. The Wii version features a reversed world where everything that is in the west on the GameCube is in the east on the Wii, and vice versa. The display is mirrored in order to make Link right-handed, to make use of the Wii remote feel more natural. The game chronicles the struggle of an older Link to clear the troubles of the interacting "Twilight Realm", a mysterious force that appears around Hyrule. When he enters this realm, he is transformed into a wolf, and loses the ability to use his sword, shield or other items, but gains other abilities such as sharpened senses from his new form. Twilight Princess includes an incarnation of Link's horse, Epona, for fast transportation, and features mounted battle scenarios including boss battles that were not seen in previous titles. Twilight Princess diverted from the cel shading of Wind Waker and went for graphics featuring more detailed textures, giving the game a darker atmosphere, thus making it feel more adult than previous games.
At the 2006 Game Developers Conference, a trailer for Phantom Hourglass for the Nintendo DS was shown. It revealed traditional top-down Zelda gameplay optimised for the DS' features, with a cel-shaded 3d graphical style similar to The Wind Waker. At E3 2006, Nintendo confirmed the game's status as a direct sequel to The Wind Waker,[85] and released an extensive playable demo, including a multiplayer mode with "capture the flag" elements. Phantom Hourglass was released on June 23, 2007, in Japan, October 1, 2007, in North America and October 19, 2007, in Europe.
The next Legend of Zelda for the DS, The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks, was released December 7, 2009, in North America and December 11, 2009, in the UK. In this game, the 'spirit tracks', railroads which chain an ancient evil, are disappearing from Hyrule. Zelda and Link go to the 'Spirit Tower' (the ethereal point of convergence for the tracks) to find out why. But villains steal Zelda's body for the resurrection of the Demon King. Rendered disembodied, Zelda is left a spirit, and only Link (and a certain few sages) can see her. Together they go on a quest to restore the spirit tracks, defeat the Demon King, and return Zelda to her body. Using a modified engine of that used in Phantom Hourglass, the notably new feature in this game is that the Phantom Guardians seen in Phantom Hourglass are, through a series of events, periodically controllable. It was the first time in the series that both Link & Zelda work together on the quest.
2010s[edit]
In April 2008, Miyamoto stated that "the Zelda team is forming again to work on new games".[86] Miyamoto clarified in July that the Zelda team had been working on a new Zelda game for the Wii.[87] In January 2010, Nintendo Executive Satoru Iwata stated that the game would be coming out at some time in 2010, and confirmed that the game would make use of the Wii's MotionPlus feature, which had been announced too late to be integrated into the Twilight Princess Wii release. The game's subtitle was announced at E3 in 2010 as Skyward Sword, but its release was delayed to 2011.[88] The game, the earliest in the Legend of Zelda timeline, reveals the origins of Hyrule, Ganon and many elements featured in previous games. It was released on November 20, 2011; the first run included a 25th Anniversary CD of fully orchestrated music from various Zelda games, including Skyward Sword.
In addition, Nintendo celebrated the 25th anniversary of The Legend of Zelda game by releasing a Zelda game for all its current consoles in 2011: Link's Awakeningin the 3DS's Virtual Console on June 7, Ocarina of Time 3D for the 3DS in mid-June, Four Swords Anniversary Edition[89] from September 28, 2011, to February 20, 2012, as a free DSiWare download and Skyward Sword for the Wii, which was released on November 18, 2011, in Europe; on November 20, 2011, in the United States; and on November 24, 2011, in Australia. A limited edition Zelda 25th anniversary 3DS was released on December 1, 2011, in Australia.[90]
The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker HD, a remake of the original GameCube game, was released by Nintendo on September 20, 2013, digitally on the Nintendo eShop in North America with a retail release on September 26, in Japan, October 4, in North America and Europe, October 5, in Australia. A month later, Nintendo released The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds for the Nintendo 3DS, which takes place in the same setting as A Link to the Past.[91][92]
Nintendo showcased a demo reel at E3 2011, which depicted Link fighting a monster in HD.[93] In January 2013, Nintendo revealed that a new Legend of Zeldagame was being planned for the Wii U.[94] The game was officially teased at E3 2014, and was scheduled to be released in 2015. However, in March 2015, the game was delayed to 2016.[95] In April 2016, the game was delayed again to 2017; it was also announced that it would be simultaneously released on the Wii U and Nintendo Switch.[96] At E3 2016, the game was showcased under the official title, The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild.[97]
Nintendo released a second 3DS remake, The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask 3D, in North America and Europe on February 13, 2015, and in Japan and Australia on February 14, 2015.
At E3 2015, Nintendo announced The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes, a cooperative multiplayer game released for the 3DS in October 2015.[98] The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD, a high-definition remastering of Twilight Princess, was released for the Wii U in March 2016.[99]
Other games[edit]
CD-i games[edit]

The Zelda games for the Philips CD-i are infamous for their poor quality and are not canon.
Main article: CD-i games from The Legend of Zelda series
A series of video games was developed and released for the Philips CD-i in the early 1990s as a product of a compromise between Philips and Nintendo, after the companies failed to develop a CD-ROM peripheral for the Super NES. Created independently with no observation by or influence from Nintendo, the games are Link: The Faces of Evil and Zelda: The Wand of Gamelon, together with Zelda's Adventure. Nintendo never acknowledged them in the Zelda timeline, and they are considered to be in a separate, self-contained canon. These games are widely acknowledged to be the worst installments in the series.[100]
LCD games[edit]
Main article: LCD games from The Legend of Zelda series
Three Zelda-themed LCD games were created between 1989 and 1992. The Zelda version of Nintendo's Game & Watchseries was released first in August 1989 as a dual-screen handheld electronic game similar in appearance to today's Nintendo DS. It was re-released in 1998 as a Toymax, Inc. Mini Classic and was later included as an unlockable extra in Game & Watch Gallery 4, a 2002 compilation for the Game Boy Advance. While the Game & Watch Zelda was developed in-house by Nintendo, the subsequent two LCD games were developed by third parties under license by Nintendo. In October 1989, The Legend of Zelda was developed by Nelsonic as part of its Game Watch line. This game was an actual digital watch with primitive gameplay based on the original Legend of Zelda. In 1992, Epoch Co. developed Zelda no Densetsu: Kamigami no Triforce for its Barcode Battler II console. The game employed card-scanning technology similar to the later-released Nintendo e-Reader.
Cancelled games[edit]
Throughout the lifespan of the The Legend of Zelda series, a number of titles (including main series titles as well as re-releases and spin-offs) in varying states of completeness have had their releases cancelled. Perhaps the earliest of these was Gottlieb's The Legend of Zelda Pinball Machine (cancelled 1993). After securing a license from Nintendo to produce two Nintendo-franchise-based pinball machines, pinball designer Jon Norris was tasked with designing the table. Before it was completed, Gottlieb decided to repurpose the game with an American Gladiators theme. Licensing for this version ultimately fell through and the game was released as simply Gladiators (November 1993).[101]
In 1998, Nintendo cancelled The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Ura. Originally intended as an expansion disk for Ocarina of Time on the Nintendo 64DD, poor sales figures for the N64DD system led Nintendo to cancel its plans for the release. In 2002, Nintendo released a bonus disc called The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Master Quest. It contained emulated versions of Ocarina of Time and Ocarina of Time Master Quest with a number of modifications originally planned for release in Ocarina of Time Ura including GUI textures and text modified to reflect the Nintendo GameCube.[citation needed]
In 2001, under license from Nintendo, Capcom cancelled the release of The Legend of Zelda: Mystical Seed of Courage for Game Boy Color. Working with a Capcom team, Yoshiki Okamoto was originally tasked with designing a series of three Zelda titles for the Game Boy Color.[102] Referred to as the "Triforce Series",[103] the games were known as The Legend of Zelda: The Mysterious Acorn: Chapter of Power, Chapter of Wisdom, and Chapter of Courage in Japan[104]and The Legend of Zelda: Mystical Seed of Power, Mystical Seed of Wisdom, and Mystical Seed of Courage in the US.[105] The games were to interact using a password system,[103] but the limitations of this system and the difficulty of coordinating three games proved too complicated, so the team scaled back to two titles at Miyamoto's suggestion.[106][107] The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons was adapted from Mystical Seed of Power, The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages was adapted from Mystical Seed of Wisdom, and Mystical Seed of Courage was canceled.[103]
Before its 2006 release, both Link and Samus from the Metroid series were planned to be playable characters for the Wii version of Marvel: Ultimate Alliance. However, they didn't make the final release because they weren't Marvel characters.[108]
In 2011, an unnamed Zelda 25th Anniversary Compilation was cancelled. To celebrate the 25th anniversary of the series, Nintendo of America originally had planned to release a compilation of titles together for the Wii, similar to the collector's edition disc released for the GameCube in 2003. However Nintendo of Japan's president Satoru Iwata and Shigeru Miyamoto disagreed in releasing it, believing it would be too similar to the Super Mario 25th Anniversary game released in 2010.[109]
Spin-off games[edit]
As the franchise has grown in popularity, several titles have been released that are set within or star a minor character from the universe of The Legend of Zelda but are not directly connected to the main The Legend of Zelda series. Both map versions of the title BS Zelda no Densetsu for the Satellaview (released in August and December 1995) could be considered spin-offs due to the fact that they star the "Hero of Light" (portrayed by either the Satellaview's male or female avatar) as opposed to Link as the protagonist of Hyrule. A third Satellaview title released in March 1997, BS Zelda no Densetsu Inishie no Sekiban (BS The Legend of Zelda: Ancient Stone Tablets) could also be considered a spin-off for the same reason. Other spin-off titles include Freshly-Picked Tingle's Rosy Rupeeland for the Nintendo DS – an RPG released in September 2006 in Japan (Summer of 2007 in the UK) to star supporting character Tingle. A second Tingle title is Tingle's Balloon Fight DS for the Nintendo DS. Here Tingle again stars in this spin-off arcade style platformer, released in April 2007 only in Japan and available solely to Platinum Club Nintendo members. In addition to titles in which Link does not star as the protagonist, games such as the shooter title, Link's Crossbow Training (for the Wii), have been considered spin-offs due to the lack of a traditional "Save Hyrule" plot-line. Released in November 2007 as a bundle with the Wii Zapper, this game allows players to assume the identity of Link as he progresses through a series of tests to perfect his crossbow marksmanship. Color Changing Tingle's Love Balloon Trip was released in Japan in 2009 as a sequel to Freshly-Picked Tingle's Rosy Rupeeland. Hyrule Warriors, a crossover game combining the setting of of Nintendo's The Legend of Zelda series and the gameplay of Tecmo Koei's Dynasty Warriors series, was announced for the Wii U video game system in December 2013 and was released in North America in September 2014. Hyrule Warriors Legends, a version for the Nintendo 3DS containing more content and gameplay modifications, was released in March 2016. To commemorate the launch of the My Nintendo loyalty program in March 2016, Nintendo released My Nintendo Picross: The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess, a Picross puzzle game developed by Jupiter for download to the Nintendo 3DS.[110][111]
Cameos[edit]
Characters from and references to The Legend of Zelda series have appeared in a variety of other video games that go beyond what is considered a typical cameo appearance. This may include major story elements, character development, and even affect major game features.
* Link appears as a fighter in Super Smash Bros. for the Nintendo 64. Likewise in Super Smash Bros. Melee for the GameCube, he appears alongside Zelda (who is able to transform into Sheik), Ganondorf, and Young Link (the child version of Link from Ocarina of Time). These characters all have their basic appearance and items as seen in Ocarina of Time. In Super Smash Bros. Brawl for the Wii, all of Melee's Zelda characters make a return, upgraded to their models and items from Twilight Princess (with Sheik using an unused design from Twilight Princess' development), with the exception of Young Link, who is replaced by Toon Link (from The Wind Waker). Each of these characters return in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, with Zelda and Sheik now separated into two different characters. Each game in the Super Smash Bros. series features several stages and items based on the Legend of Zelda franchise.
* Link, using his Ocarina of Time design, appears as an exclusive fighter in the GameCube version of Soulcalibur II.
* Link, using a design based on Skyward Sword, appears as a playable character in Mario Kart 8 via downloadable content, along with a "Hyrule Circuit" racetrack themed on The Legend of Zelda series.[112] The first pack is named after the series.
* Link can be seen sleeping in one of the hotel beds in Rose Town on the Super NES game Super Mario RPG: Legend of the Seven Stars.
* Link features prominently in several microgames from the WarioWare series.
* In the Nintendo/Skip Ltd. game Captain Rainbow Crazy Tracy from Link's Awakening is one of the featured characters, seeking to enslave all men in the world.[113]
* One of the levels (World 5-2) in Super Mario 3D Land references The Legend of Zelda.
* In Sonic Lost World, a DLC stage based on The Legend of Zelda series was released on March 27, 2014, named "The Legend of Zelda Zone". The stage features design elements from multiple entries in the Zelda series, including Ocarina of Time, Twilight Princess, and Skyward Sword. While built around the core gameplay mechanics of Sonic Lost World, "The Legend of Zelda Zone" incorporates some elements from the Zelda series, including a heart-based vitality meter, rupee collection, and a miniature dungeon to explore.[114]
* A picture of the Link from the original NES game can be formed on World Star-1 in Super Mario 3D World by stepping on the buttons while defeating enemies.
* Items based on The Legend of Zelda, including furniture, clothing, wallpaper, and carpeting, can be collected in each of the Animal Crossing games. Additionally, a fully playable version of the original The Legend of Zelda for NES can be accessed in the first Animal Crossing title through the use of a cheat device.
* In Bayonetta and Bayonetta 2 on the Wii U, there is an unlockable costume for Bayonetta called Hero of Hyrule that changes Bayonetta's clothing to Link's, complete with the Master Sword and Hylian Shield on her right arm.
* Several costume power ups based on The Legend of Zelda, with at least one being free DLC, can be unlocked through normal gameplay or via Amiibo in Super Mario Maker.
* A special gold version of the Game Boy Camera features Ocarina of Time themed Zelda stamps instead of the usual Mario stamps found in all other Game Boy Camera color variants.
Reception and legacy[edit]
Aggregate review scores
As of April 29, 2016.GameGameRankingsMetacriticThe Legend of Zelda(NES) 84%[115]
(GBA) 79%[116](GBA) 84[117]The Adventure of Link(NES) 78%[118]
(GBA) 69%[119](GBA) 73[120]A Link to the Past(SNES) 93%[121]
(GBA) 92%[122](GBA) 95[123]Link's Awakening(GB) 90%[124]
(GBC) 91%[125]–Ocarina of Time(N64) 98%[126]
(GC) 90%[127]
(3DS) 94%[128](N64) 99[129]
(GC) 91[130]
(3DS) 94[131]Majora's Mask(N64) 92%[132]
(3DS) 90%[133](N64) 95[134]
(3DS) 89[135]Oracle of Seasons and Ages(Seasons) 91%[136]
(Ages) 92%[137]–Four Swords(NDS) 85%[138](NDS) 85[139]The Wind Waker(GC) 94%[140]
(Wii U) 91%[141](GC) 96[142]
(Wii U) 90[143]Four Swords Adventures(GC) 85%[144](GC) 86[145]The Minish Cap(GBA) 90%[146](GBA) 89[147]Twilight Princess(GC) 95%[148]
(Wii) 95%[149]
(Wii U) 86%[150](GC) 96[151]
(Wii) 95[152]
(Wii U) 86[153]Phantom Hourglass(NDS) 89%[154](NDS) 90[155]Spirit Tracks(NDS) 87%[156](NDS) 87[157]Skyward Sword(Wii) 93%[158](Wii) 93[159]A Link Between Worlds(3DS) 91%[160](3DS) 91[161]Tri Force Heroes(3DS) 72%[162](3DS) 73[163]The Legend of Zelda series has received outstanding levels of acclaim from critics and the public. Ocarina of Time, The Wind Waker and Skyward Sword have each received a perfect 40/40 score (10/10 by four reviewers) by Japanese Famitsu magazine,[164][165] making Zelda one of the few series with multiple perfect scores. Ocarina of Time was even listed by Guinness World Records as the highest-rated video game in history, citing its Metacritic score of 99 out of 100.[166] Computer and Video Games awarded The Wind Waker and Twilight Princess a score of 10/10.[167][168] A Link to the Past has won Gold Award from Electronic Gaming Monthly. In Nintendo Power's Top 200 countdown in 2004, Ocarina of Time took first place, and seven other Zelda games placed in the top 40.[169]Twilight Princess was named Game of the Year by X-Play, GameTrailers, 1UP, Electronic Gaming Monthly, Spacey Awards, Game Informer, GameSpy, Nintendo Power, IGN, and many other websites. The editors of review aggregator websites Game Rankings, IGN and Metacritic have all given Ocarina of Time their highest aggregate scores.[170] Game Informer has awarded The Wind Waker, Twilight Princess, Skyward Sword, and A Link Between Worlds with scores of 10/10. Phantom Hourglass was named DS Game of the Year by IGN and GameSpy.[171][172] Airing December 10, 2011, Spike TV's annual Video Game Awards gave the series the first ever "Hall of Fame Award", which Miyamoto accepted in person.[173] Ocarina of Time and its use of melodic themes to identify different game regions has been called a reverse of Richard Wagner's use of leitmotifs to identify characters and themes.[174] Ocarina of Time was so well received that sales increased for real ocarinas.[175] IGN praised the music of Majora's Mask for its brilliance despite its heavy use of MIDI. It has been ranked the seventh-greatest game by Electronic Gaming Monthly, whereas Ocarina of Time was ranked eighth.[176][177] The series won GameFAQs Best Series Ever competition.[178]
As of April 2011, the The Legend of Zelda franchise has sold 62 million copies,[179] with the original The Legend of Zelda being the fourth best-selling NES game of all time.[180][181] The series was ranked as the 64th top game (collectively) by Next Generation in 1996.[182] According to British film magazine Empire, with "the most vividly-realised world and the most varied game-play of any title on any console, Zelda is a solid bet for the best game series ever."[183]
Impact[edit]
Among celebrities
* Professional wrestler Cody Runnels (better known as Cody Rhodes) is a fan of the series and has stated he replays A Link to the Past annually. His wrestling boots feature a Triforce symbol.[184][185]
* Actor/comedian Robin Williams revealed in a November 26, 2009, interview with Jimmy Fallonthat his daughter Zelda Rae is named after the title character in the series.[186] In 2011, both Williams and his daughter starred together in an advertisement for Ocarina of Time 3D.[187]
* In August 2013, talk-show host Jimmy Fallon stated that The Legend of Zelda was his favorite video game.[188]
In film
* The 2010 film adaptation of Scott Pilgrim vs. the World makes multiple references to the Zelda games and the soundtrack, including use of the "Fairy Fountain" theme in one of the film's dream sequences, and the chest opening sound effect and opening theme from A Link to the Past.[189]
In literature
* The cover of the first edition of Nicholas Andrews's humorous fantasy novel, The Adventure Tournament (2011), is a parody of The Legend of Zelda title screen. The author states that it is fitting, since he was introduced to fantasy through the first The Legend of Zelda game.[190] Link's hat is referenced in the book as a possible piece of equipment for the main character, Remy, who rejects it on the grounds that it would make him look kind of like "a big green bean." He then brushes off a response that one of the world's greatest warriors wore a similar cap.
In parodies and pranks
* "Child Fearing", an episode of The Powerpuff Girls, features the Mayor of Townsville playing a spoof of Ocarina of Time.[191]
* In 2008, IGN.com made a fanfilm trailer based on The Legend of Zelda as an April Fools' Day prank.[192]
* The Legend of Neil is a web-video series that aired on Comedy Central, spoofing the original The Legend of Zelda game.[193]
In television
* In episode six "Shawn, Interrupted" in season six of Psych, young Shawn remarks to his father that he is going upstairs to play Zelda.[194]
* In an episode of Jeopardy! which aired on July 12, 2013, the title of the original game was the correct response to the clue in Final Jeopardy. The clue was a reference to Princess Zelda being named after Zelda Fitzgerald: "The title princess of this game, which launched a best-selling franchise, was named for F. Scott Fitzgerald's wife".
* In an episode of The Goldbergs, Adam almost completed The Legend of Zelda, after much effort and left the room to get his camera. But, his brother unknowingly continued and finished the game, to Adam's anger. At the end of the episode, his brother makes it up to him by giving him a new copy of Zelda II: The Adventure of Link and offered to play it together.
* In The Amazing World of Gumball they make three references. The first reference takes place in The Promise when Gumball gets a game called The Tales of Zelmore, supposedly based on The Legend of Zelda. The second reference takes place in The Promise when he opens the game it makes the Zelda treasure chest sound. The third reference takes place in The Treasure when the light hits the chimney, they play the Zelda secret sound.
Video game creators
* ?kami director Hideki Kamiya states that he has been influenced by The Legend of Zelda series in developing the title, citing The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past as his favorite game of all time.[195]
* The developers of the game Dark Sector have stated they have been heavily influenced by The Legend of Zelda series, and that the structure of the game is much like a Zelda game.[196]
* Fable series creator Peter Molyneux stated that Twilight Princess is one of his favorite games. "I just feel it's jaw-dropping and its use of the hardware was brilliant. And I've played that game through several times," he said to TechRadar.[197]
Other media[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Main article: List of The Legend of Zelda media
TV series[edit]
Main article: The Legend of Zelda (TV series)
A 13-episode American animated TV series, adapted by DiC and distributed by Viacom Enterprises, aired in 1989. The animated Zelda shorts were broadcast each Friday, instead of the usual Super Mario Bros. cartoon which was aired during the rest of the week. The series loosely follows the two NES Zelda games (the original The Legend of Zelda and The Adventure of Link), mixing settings and characters from those games with original creations. The show's older incarnations of both Link and Zelda appear in various episodes of Captain N: The Game Master during its second season.
Print media[edit]
Valiant Comics released a short series of comics featuring characters and settings from the Zelda cartoon as part of their Nintendo Comics System line. Manga adaptations of many entries in the series, including A Link to the Past, Ocarina of Time, Majora's Mask, Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages, Four Swords Adventures, The Minish Cap, and Phantom Hourglass, have been produced under license from Nintendo, mostly in Japan. These cartoons are usually not involved with the chronology of the actual games.[clarification needed]
A number of official books, novels, and gamebooks have been released based on the series as well. The earliest was Moblin's Magic Spear, published in 1989 by Western Publishing under their Golden Books Family Entertainment division and written by Jack C. Harris. It took place sometime during the first game. Two gamebooks were published as part of the Nintendo Adventure Books series by Archway, both of which were written by Matt Wayne. The first was The Crystal Trap(which focuses more on Zelda) and the second was The Shadow Prince. Both were released in 1992. A novel based on Ocarina of Time was released in 1999, written by Jason R. Rich and published by Sybex Inc. under their Pathways to Adventure series. Another two gamebooks were released as part of the You Decide on the Adventure series published by Scholastic. The first book was based on Oracle of Seasons and released in 2001 and the second was based on Oracle of Ages released in 2002. Both were written by Craig Wessel. In 2006, Scholastic released a novel as part of their Nintendo Heroes series titled Link and the Portal of Doom. It was written by Tracey West and was set shortly after the events of Ocarina of Time.
In 2011, to coincide with the 25th anniversary of the series, an art book was published exclusively in Japan under the name Hyrule Historia by Shogakukan. It contains concept art from the series's conception to the release of Skyward Sword in 2011 and multiple essays about the production of the games, as well as an overarching timeline of the series. It also includes a prequel manga to Skyward Sword by Zelda manga duo Akira Himekawa. The book received an international release by publisher Dark Horse Comics on January 29, 2013;[198] it took the number one spot on Amazon's sales chart, taking the spot away from E. L. James's 50 Shades of Grey trilogy.[199] Dark Horse will release The Legend of Zelda: Art & Artifacts, a follow-up art book to Hyrule Historia containing additional artwork and interviews, in February 2017.[200]
Music[edit]
Taking place in Cologne, Germany, on September 23, 2010, the video game music concert Symphonic Legends focused on music from Nintendo and, among others, featured titles such as The Legend of Zelda. Following an intermission, the second half of the concert was entirely dedicated to an expansive symphonic poem dedicated to the series. The 35 minute epic tells the story of Link's evolution from child to hero.[201][202]
To celebrate the 25th anniversary of the series in 2011, Nintendo commissioned an original symphony, The Legend of Zelda: Symphony of the Goddesses. The show was originally performed in the fall of 2011 in Los Angeles and consists of live performances of much of the music from the series.[203] It has since been scheduled for 18 shows so far throughout the United States and Canada.[203][204] Nintendo released a CD titled The Legend of Zelda 25th Anniversary Special Orchestra CD. Featuring eight tracks from live performances of the symphony, the CD is included alongside the special edition of The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword for the Wii.
Violinist Lindsey Stirling released a single called "Zelda Medley" in 2011, along with a popular YouTube video in which she is dressed as Link.[205]
Potential films[edit]
In 2007, Imagi Animation Studios, who provided the animation for TMNT and Astro Boy, created a pitch reel for a computer-animated The Legend of Zelda movie. Nintendo did not take the studio up on their offer due to the failure of the live-action movie adaption of Super Mario Bros.[206]
In 2013, Aonuma stated that, if development of a film were to move forward, the company would want to use the opportunity to embrace audience interaction in some capacity.[207][208]
Monopoly[edit]
The Legend of Zelda-themed Monopoly board game was released in the United States on September 15, 2014.[209]
References[edit]
1. Jump up^ Barton, Matt (2008). Dungeons & Desktops: The History of Computer Role-Playing Games. A K Peters, Ltd. pp. 209–10, 216, 385. ISBN 1-56881-411-9. Retrieved September 8, 2010.
2. Jump up^ Pichlmair, Martin; Kayali, Fares (2007). "Levels of Sound: On the Principles of Interactivity in Music Video Games" (PDF). Situated Play, Proceedings of DiGRA 2007 Conference.
3. Jump up^ Lane, Pete (February 26, 1999). "Review: Legend of Zelda". BBC News. Retrieved April 6, 2008.
4. Jump up^ McDonald, Glenn (February 26, 1999). "A Brief Timeline of Video Game Music". GameSpot. Archived from the original on October 18, 2007. Retrieved April 6, 2008.
5. Jump up^ Whalen, Zach (2007). "Play Along – An Approach to Videogame Music". Game Studies. 4 (1). Retrieved April 6, 2008.
6. Jump up^ Mirabella, Fran. "Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask". IGN. Retrieved April 6,2008.
7. Jump up^ MacDonald, Mark (May 3, 2005). "Zelda Exposed from 1UP.com". 1UP.com. IGN. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015.
8. Jump up^ "ScrewAttack's Top Ten Video Game Themes Ever". ScrewAttack's Top 10. ScrewAttack. October 17, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
9. Jump up^ "Zelda producer says Link may never talk". GamesRadar. Retrieved July 22,2011.
10. Jump up^ Lloyd, Rod (15 June 2016). "Breath of the Wild's Soundtrack Makes Heavy Use of Piano and Environmental Sounds". Retrieved 16 June 2016.
11. Jump up^ Andrew Vestal (September 14, 2000). "The History of Zelda". GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 31, 2011. Retrieved September 25, 2006.
12. Jump up^ Todd Mowatt. "In the Game: Nintendo's Shigeru Miyamoto". Amazon.com. Archived from the original on December 20, 2007. Retrieved September 25,2006.
13. Jump up^http://www.nintendolife.com/news/2012/11/the_legend_of_zeldas_link_was_inspired_by_walt_disneys_peter_pan
14. Jump up^ http://nintendoeverything.com/link-design-inspired-by-peter-pan-name-explained/
15. Jump up^ http://www.zeldadungeon.net/2012/05/zelda-and-mythology-arthurian-legend/
16. Jump up^ http://www.mabinogion.info/index.html
17. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 21, 1998). The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Great Deku Tree: Before time began, before spirits and life existed... Three golden goddesses descended upon the chaos that was Hyrule... Din, the Goddess of Power... Nayru, the Goddess of Wisdom... Farore, the Goddess of Courage... Din... With her strong flaming arms, she cultivated the land and created the red earth. Nayru... Poured her wisdom onto the earth and gave the spirit of law to the world. Farore... With her rich soul, produced all life forms who would uphold the law.
18. ^ Jump up to:a b Shigeru Miyamoto, Eiji Aonuma (January 29, 2013). The Legend of Zelda: Hyrule Historia. Milwaukie, Oregon: Dark Horse. p. 76. ISBN 978-1616550417.
19. Jump up^ Nintendo, ed. (1992). The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past manual. Nintendo. p. 3.
20. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 21, 1998). The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Zelda: If someone with a righteous heart makes a wish, it will lead Hyrule into a golden age of prosperity. If one with an evil mind has his wish granted, the world will be consumed by evil... That is what is foretold...
21. Jump up^ Shigeru Miyamoto, Eiji Aonuma (January 29, 2013). The Legend of Zelda: Hyrule Historia. Milwaukie, Oregon: Dark Horse. p. 70. ISBN 978-1616550417.
22. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 21, 1998). The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Sheik: The resting place of the sacred triangle, the Sacred Realm, is a mirror that reflects what is in the heart...the heart of one who enters it... If an evil heart, the Realm will become full of evil; if pure, the Realm will become a paradise.
23. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 18, 2011). The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Zelda: In his thirst to make the world his own, Demise readied a massive army of monsters for war. He sought to take the Triforce for himself by force.
24. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 21, 1998). The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Introduction: Handed down by the gods of old, this power gave its holder the means to make any desire a reality. Such was the might of the ultimate power that the old ones placed it in the care of the goddess.
25. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 18, 2011). The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Zelda: She made the spirit that resides in your sword to serve a single purpose: to assist her chosen hero on his mission.
26. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 18, 2011). The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Zelda: Knowing this power was her last and only hope, the goddess gave up her divine powers and her immortal form.
27. Jump up^ Nintendo (November 18, 2011). The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Demise: I will rise again. Those like you... Those who share the blood of the goddess and the spirit of the hero... They are eternally bound to this curse. An incarnation of my hatred shall ever follow your kind, dooming them to wander a blood-soaked sea of darkness for all time!
28. Jump up^ Nintendo, ed. (2000). The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask manual. Nintendo. p. 6.
29. Jump up^ "Most games in The Legend of Zelda series have a connection to Hyrule. Does the land of Hytopia connect to Hyrule in any way?". Nintendo. Retrieved July 20,2016.
30. Jump up^ "The Great Hyrule Encyclopedia (K)". Nintendo. Retrieved June 7, 2009.
31. Jump up^ "Official Legend of Zelda Timeline Revealed". December 22, 2011. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012.
32. Jump up^ Fred Dutton (May 3, 2010). "Zelda Timeline Explained". Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
33. Jump up^ "Shigeru Miyamoto Interview". Super PLAY (in Swedish). Medströms Dataförlag AB (4/03). March 2003. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. Retrieved September 24, 2006.
34. Jump up^ Long, Neil; Scullion, Chris. "Game On – The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword". Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited (July 2010): 51.
35. Jump up^ Nintendo EAD (January 14, 1987). The Legend of Zelda 2: Link no B?ken. Famicom Disk System. Nintendo Co., Ltd. Several years after Gannon was destroyed, Link learns from Impa about another sleeping Princess Zelda.
36. Jump up^ Nintendo EAD (December 1988). Zelda II: The Adventure of Link. Nintendo Entertainment System. Nintendo of America, Inc. After Ganon was destroyed, Impa told Link a sleeping spell was cast on Princess Zelda.
37. Jump up^ "Zelda no Densetsu: Kamigami no Triforce – Back Cover" (in Japanese). Nintendo Co., Ltd. (via MobyGames). November 21, 1991. Retrieved June 10,2010. ?????????????????????????????????????????? / This time, the stage is set a long time before Link's exploits, an era when Hyrule was still one kingdom.
38. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past – Back Cover". Nintendo of America, Inc. (via MobyGames). April 13, 1992. Retrieved June 10, 2010. The predecessors of Link and Zelda face monsters on the march when a menacing magician takes over the kingdom.
39. Jump up^ "Dengeki Nintendo 64". Dengeki Nintendo 64. MediaWorks, Inc. January 1999. Shigeru Miyamoto: (???????)???????????????????????? / Ocarina of Time, A Link to the Past, then comes the original one and The Adventure of Link in turn.
40. Jump up^ Nintendo, ed (1993). The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening instruction manual. Nintendo. pp. 3–4. "Though you fulfilled the Hyrulian prophecy of the Legendary Hero and destroyed the evil tyrant Ganon, the land of Hyrule enjoyed only a precarious peace. "Who knows what threats may arise from Ganon's ashes?" the restless people murmured as they knitted their brows and shook their heads. Ever vigilant, you decided to journey away from Hyrule on a quest for enlightenment, in search of wisdom that would make you better able to withstand the next threat to your homeland."
41. Jump up^ "Zelda??? ?????". Nintendo Co., Ltd. Retrieved June 10, 2010.
42. Jump up^ The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past Instruction Booklet. Nintendo of America, Inc. April 13, 1992. pp. 5–6. Many centuries have passed since the Imprisoning War.
43. Jump up^ "??????????????????????!". Hobo Nikkan Itoi Shinbun. November 26, 1998. Retrieved June 9, 2010. Satoru Takizawa: ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? / The story this time is not truly original, it's from the previous SNES version and tells of the "Seal War of the Seven Sages".
44. Jump up^ Neil Long, Chris Scullion. "Game On – The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword". Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited (July 2010): 51. Eiji Aonuma: I have already talked to Mr. Miyamoto about this so I am comfortable in releasing this information – this title [Skyward Sword] takes place before Ocarina of Time.
45. ^ Jump up to:a b "Long interview with Eiji Aonuma". nindori.com. Nintendo DREAM. Feb 2007. Archived from the original on January 27, 2007. Retrieved June 4, 2010. ???????????????????? ... ???????????????????????????????7?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? / It is a world 100 and something years after Ocarina of Time. ... The Wind Waker is parallel. In Ocarina of Time, Link leaps to a world seven years later, defeats Ganon, and then returns to the child era, right? Twilight Princess is the world 100 and something years after peace is restored in the child era.
46. ^ Jump up to:a b Fennec Fox (December 6, 2002). "Interview With Nintendo's Shigeru Miyamoto and Eiji Aonuma". GamePro. GamePro Media. Archived from the original on July 28, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010.
47. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass". Zelda Universe. Nintendo of America, Inc. Retrieved June 10, 2010.
48. Jump up^ Walton, Mark (November 20, 2009). "The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks Eiji Aonuma Interview". GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Eiji Aonuma: Yes, it is actually a sequel and it is taking place about 100 years after the world of the game Phantom Hourglass.
49. Jump up^ Billy Berghammer (May 17, 2004). "A Legend Of Zelda: The Eiji Aonuma Interview". Game Informer Online. Game Informer Magazine. Archived from the original on May 7, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2009.
50. Jump up^ "Zelda: The interview!". Nintendo of Europe GmbH. November 17, 2004. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved May 30, 2010. NoE:How does the Minish Cap fit into the Zelda chronology? Is it a prequel to the upcoming The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures on GameCube? Aonuma: Yes, this title takes place prior to The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures, and tells the secret of the birth of the Four Sword.
51. Jump up^ Jose Otero (August 7, 2013). "New Details for The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds". IGN. Retrieved August 7, 2013.
52. Jump up^ "The Library: Hall of Time". Nintendo of America, Inc. Archived from the original on October 2, 2002.
53. Jump up^ East, Thomas (May 23, 2011). "Ocarina writer wanted to put Zelda timeline online". Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited. Archived from the original on October 9, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
54. Jump up^ Casamassina, Matt (September 20, 2006). "Miyamoto Talks Righty Link". IGN. Retrieved December 28, 2007.
55. ^ Jump up to:a b c d Eiji Aonuma (ed.). Hyrule Historia. Dark Horse Books.
56. Jump up^ ZELDA: The Second Quest Begins (1988), pp. 27–28
57. Jump up^ "BS Zelda Info". 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2010.
58. Jump up^ "BS Zelda Info". 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2010.
59. Jump up^ "'The Legend of Zelda'". NinDB. Retrieved February 20, 2008.
60. Jump up^ "BS Zelda Info". 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2010.
61. Jump up^ "The Best Video Games in the History of Humanity". filibustercartoons.com. 2006. Retrieved November 16, 2009.
62. Jump up^ "NP Top 200". Nintendo Power. 200. February 2006. p. 66.
63. Jump up^ "Gaiden and Ura Zelda Split". IGN. August 20, 1999. Retrieved April 10, 2007.
64. Jump up^ *The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time instruction booklet. Nintendo. 1998. pp. 11–12. U/NUS-NZLE-USA.
65. Jump up^ "Zelda's Future is Golden". IGN. August 26, 1998. Retrieved September 24,2007.
66. ^ Jump up to:a b "Zelda Bonus Disc Coming to US". IGN. December 4, 2002. Retrieved January 22, 2006.
67. ^ Jump up to:a b "The Legend of Zelda Collector's Edition". IGN. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
68. Jump up^ Hatfield, Daemon (February 23, 2007). "VC Getting (Arguably) Greatest Game Ever". IGN. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
69. Jump up^ Ronaghan, Neal (July 2, 2015). "This Week in the Nintendo Downloads". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015.
70. ^ Jump up to:a b Mirabella III, Fran (October 25, 2000). "Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask". IGN. Retrieved December 3, 2005.
71. Jump up^ "Zelda Sequel Invades Spaceworld". IGN. June 16, 1999. Retrieved January 10, 2006.
72. ^ Jump up to:a b Pelland, Scott (ed.) (2001). The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons/The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages Player's Guide. Redmond, Washington: Nintendo of America, Inc. p. 124. ISBN 1-930206-10-0.
73. Jump up^ Pelland, Scott (ed.) (2001). The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons/The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages Player's Guide. Redmond, Washington: Nintendo of America, Inc. p. 120. ISBN 1-930206-10-0.
74. Jump up^ "Miyamoto Speaks on Zelda GBC". IGN. August 23, 1999. Retrieved March 30,2007.
75. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: The Third Oracle profile". IGN. Retrieved March 30,2007.
76. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons Interview". Nintendo. 2001. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved March 30, 2007.
77. Jump up^ Brad Shoemaker (2004). "The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages for Game Boy Color Review". GameSpot. Retrieved September 25, 2006.
78. Jump up^ "The Ultimate Gamecube FAQ". IGN. July 10, 2001. Retrieved January 21,2006.
79. Jump up^ "Zelda on Gamecube". IGN. August 23, 2000. Retrieved January 21, 2006.
80. Jump up^ Dingo, Star (August 24, 2001). "GameCube / First Look / The Legend of Zelda". GamePro. Archived from the original on January 4, 2006. Retrieved January 21, 2006.
81. Jump up^ "Miyamoto and Aonuma on Zelda". IGN. December 4, 2002. Retrieved January 21, 2006.
82. Jump up^ Torres, Ricardo (November 14, 2003). "The Legend of Zelda Collector's Edition Bundle Impressions". GameSpot. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
83. ^ Jump up to:a b c IGN Staff (November 4, 2003). "Zelda Bundle at $99". IGN. Retrieved June 26, 2006.
84. ^ Jump up to:a b c Calvert, Justin (January 5, 2004). "New Zelda promotion for UK". GameSpot. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
85. Jump up^ "Continue the Wind Waker adventure in Link's first DS game". Nintendo. Archived from the original on January 16, 2007.
86. Jump up^ Parish, Jeremy (April 17, 2008). "Miyamoto on Wii Fit, Hardcore Gamers". 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Retrieved July 16, 2008.[dead link]
87. Jump up^ Casamassina, Matt (July 15, 2008). "E3 2008: Miyamoto Says New Zelda for Wii Progressing". IGN Wii. IGN Entertainment, Inc. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
88. Jump up^ Kohler, Chris (November 2, 2009). "Wii Zelda Uses MotionPlus for Swordplay, Targeting". Wired. Retrieved December 13, 2010.
89. Jump up^ "Iwata Asks : The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D : One Year Steeped in The Legend of Zelda". Nintendo. p. 6. Retrieved June 29, 2011. Miyamoto: [...] and The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords, scheduled for free download as the Nintendo DSiWare software starting in September.
90. Jump up^ "Limited Edition The Legend of Zelda 25th Anniversary 3DS". Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
91. Jump up^ Aonuma, Eiji (November 4, 2011). "Interview with Eiji Aonuma and Koji Kondo". MyGames (Interview) (in Portuguese). Interview with Daniel Silvestre. Archived from the original on November 6, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
92. Jump up^ Brian Ashcraft (April 17, 2013). "The Next 3DS Zelda Is Set In The World Of Link To The Past". Kotaku. Retrieved April 17, 2013.
93. Jump up^ Phil Kollar (September 11, 2011). "Aonuma Drops Hints On Zelda Wii U And Next Zelda For 3DS". Game Informer. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
94. Jump up^ Richard George. "New HD Zelda Revealed for Wii U". IGN. Retrieved January 23, 2013.
95. Jump up^ Tassi, Paul (March 27, 2015). "Nintendo Announces The Wii U's 'Legend of Zelda' Won't Be Seen In 2015". Forbes. Retrieved March 28, 2015.
96. Jump up^ Vogel, Mitch (April 27, 2016). "The Legend of Zelda Wii U Has Been Pushed Back to 2017, Will Release on NX As Well". Nintendo Life. Gamer Network. Retrieved April 27, 2016.
97. Jump up^ The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild - Official Game Trailer - Nintendo E3 2016. Los Angeles, California: Nintendo. 14 June 2016. Retrieved 15 June 2016.
98. Jump up^ Otero, Jose (June 16, 2015). "E3 2015: The Legend of Zelda: Triforce Heroes Revealed for 3DS". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 16, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.
99. Jump up^ McWhertor, Michael (November 12, 2015). "The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD coming to Wii U in 2016". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2015.
100. Jump up^ "The 6 Worst Games Ever Farted Out by Beloved Franchises". Cracked.com.
101. Jump up^ Norris, Jon. "The Legend of Zelda Pinball Machine". Norrispinball.com. 17 June 2014.
102. Jump up^ "Miyamoto Speaks on Zelda GBC". IGN. August 23, 1999. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
103. ^ Jump up to:a b c "The Legend of Zelda: The Third Oracle profile". IGN. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
104. Jump up^ "Okamoto on Zelda". IGN. November 16, 1999. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
105. Jump up^ "Official US Names for Tri-Force series". IGN. May 13, 2000. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
106. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons Interview". Nintendo. 2001. Archived from the original on March 11, 2005. Retrieved March 30, 2007.
107. Jump up^ "Zelda's Tri-Force Down To Two". IGN. July 24, 2000. Retrieved January 2,2008.
108. Jump up^ Pop-Fiction Episode 9: The Invisible Man (Flash video). GameTrailers. July 29, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
109. Jump up^ "Nintendo Has Crushed Your Dreams of a Zelda 25th Anniversary Compilation". Kotaku. June 17, 2011.
110. Jump up^ Makuch, Eddie (March 7, 2016). "Legend of Zelda Picross Revealed As "My Nintendo" Bonus - Report". GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016.
111. Jump up^ "My Nintendo Picross: The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess". My Nintendo. 2016. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
112. Jump up^ Plunkett, Luke (August 26, 2014). "Zelda, Animal Crossing Coming to Mario Kart 8". Kotaku. Retrieved August 26, 2014.
113. Jump up^ "Top 20 Weirdest Zelda Characters – Crazy Tracy". IGN. January 24, 2011.
114. Jump up^ Otero, Jose (March 26, 2014). "Sonic Lost World's Zelda Crossover". IGN. Retrieved March 26, 2013.
115. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved January 4, 2014.
116. Jump up^ "Classic NES Series: The Legend of Zelda Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
117. Jump up^ "Classic NES Series: The Legend of Zelda Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
118. Jump up^ "Zelda II: The Adventure of Link Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30,2011.
119. Jump up^ "Classic NES Series: Zelda II: The Adventure of Link Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
120. Jump up^ "Classic NES Series: Zelda II: The Adventure of Link Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
121. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
122. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past & Four Swords Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
123. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past & Four Swords Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
124. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
125. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening DX Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
126. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
127. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time / Master Quest Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
128. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
129. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
130. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time / Master Quest Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
131. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
132. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
133. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask 3D Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved March 12, 2015.
134. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30,2011.
135. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask 3D Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved March 12, 2015.
136. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
137. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
138. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Anniversary Edition Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
139. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Anniversary Edition Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved January 2, 2014.
140. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
141. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker HD Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved December 5, 2013.
142. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
143. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker HD Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 5, 2013.
144. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
145. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
146. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
147. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
148. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
149. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
150. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD Reviews". GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 6, 2016.
151. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
152. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
153. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD for Wii U Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 29, 2016.
154. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
155. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
156. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
157. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30,2011.
158. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
159. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved April 30,2011.
160. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds Reviews". GameRankings. Retrieved January 4, 2014.
161. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved October 26, 2013.
162. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes for 3DS". GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved December 28, 2015.
163. Jump up^ "The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes for 3DS Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved December 28, 2015.
164. Jump up^ "Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time (n64: 1998): Reviews". Metacritic. November 25, 1998. Retrieved May 5, 2007.
165. Jump up^ "Zelda Scores Big". IGN. December 11, 2002. Retrieved January 24, 2006.
166. Jump up^ Guinness World Records. "Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition – Records – Nintendo". Archived from the original on April 5, 2008.
167. Jump up^ "Zelda The Wind Waker". CVG. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved October 2, 2008.
168. Jump up^ "Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess". CVG. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2008.
169. Jump up^ "NP Top 200". Nintendo Power. 200. pp. 58–66.
170. Jump up^ "Game Rankings – Rankings". Archived from the original on May 29, 2007. Retrieved May 18, 2008.
171. Jump up^ "IGN Best of 2007: Best Nintendo DS Game". IGN. Retrieved October 2, 2008.
172. Jump up^ "GameSpy's Game of the Year 2007: DS Top 10". GameSpy. Retrieved January 1, 2008.
173. Jump up^ "Video Game Awards: Mr. Miyamoto Accepts The Legend Of Zelda's Hall Of Fame Award". Spike TV. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
174. Jump up^ Zach Whalen (November 1, 2004). "Play Along – An Approach to Videogame Music". Game Studies. Retrieved March 29, 2008.
175. Jump up^ Sharon R. King (February 15, 1999). "Compressed Data; Can You Play 'Feelings' On the Ocarina?". 1UP.com. Retrieved March 28, 2008.
176. Jump up^ "Top 100 games of all time". Gamers.com. GX Media. Archived from the original on June 19, 2004.
177. Jump up^ Fran Mirabella III (October 25, 2000). "Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask". IGN. Retrieved March 29, 2008.
178. Jump up^ "Summer 2006: Best. Series. Ever.". GameFAQs. Retrieved 2007-09-23.
179. Jump up^ Molina, Brett (November 20, 2011). "'The Legend of Zelda' launches today; check out our review". USA Today. Gannett Company. Retrieved February 8, 2016.
180. Jump up^ Nintendo of America (July 2, 2007). "Like Sands Through the Hourglass, Zelda's Debut on Nintendo DS Approaches" (Press release). Redmond, WA: PR Newswire. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
181. Jump up^ "Top Selling Old Nintendo Games". Old Nintendo Games. Retrieved October 6,2010.[dead link]
182. Jump up^ Next Generation. United States: Imagine Media. September 1996. p. 52.
183. Jump up^ Kennedy, Colin, "The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker Review", Empire.
184. Jump up^ Robinson, Jon (April 13, 2009). "Cody Rhodes: Link to the Past". ESPN. Retrieved October 14, 2009.
185. Jump up^ Christensen, Matt (July 2008). "What's In Your Travel Bag?". WWE Magazine. p. 49.
186. Jump up^ Matthew Razak. "Robin Williams named his daughter after Princess Zelda".
187. Jump up^ "Robin Williams Named His Daughter After Princess Zelda". Kotaku. June 15, 2011.
188. Jump up^ "Jimmy Fallon Loves The Legend of Zelda as his Favourite Game". cubed3. Retrieved September 4, 2013.
189. Jump up^ Mai, Peter (August 17, 2010). "Every Video Game Reference in "Scott Pilgrim vs the World"". ocweekly.com. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2016.
190. Jump up^ Bannon, Jeanne (August 1, 2011). "Interview with author Nicholas Andrews". Beyond Words.
191. Jump up^ "tv.com". tv.com. Retrieved May 1, 2009.
192. Jump up^ "Legend of Zelda (April Fools' Day) Movie Trailer Premiere". IGN. April 1, 2008.
193. Jump up^ "The Legend of Neil". Comedy Central. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012.
194. Jump up^ "Quotes from Psych". Retrieved May 29, 2013.
195. Jump up^ Jonti Davies (March 2007). "Okami creator 'disappointed' by Twilight Princess". joystiq.com.
196. Jump up^ Mike Jackson (March 2007). "Dark Sector Interview: Sinister, gory and influenced by Zelda". Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on March 9, 2007.
197. Jump up^ Hugh Langley. "Peter Molyneux's top five games of all time". TechRadar. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
198. Jump up^ Max, Josh. "Dark Horse Comics Localizing Hyrule Historia". Nintendo World Report.
199. Jump up^ McMillan, Graeme. "Amazon suffers 'Hyrule Historia' hysteria". Digital Trends.
200. Jump up^ McWhertor, Michael (August 22, 2016). "Dark Horse publishing new The Legend of Zelda art book in 2017". Polygon. Vox Media. Retrieved August 22, 2016.
201. Jump up^ "Interview with WDR Radio Orchestra Manager Winfried Fechner Part 1". Square Enix Music Online. March 2010. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
202. Jump up^ "Symphonic Legends Program Announcement". Square Enix Music Online. September 2010. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2010.
203. ^ Jump up to:a b "More dates revealed for 'Legend of Zelda' symphony tour". USA Today. January 5, 2012.
204. Jump up^ "Zelda Symphony". zelda-symphony.com.
205. Jump up^ "Zelda Medley – Single". Lindseystomp Music, LLC. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012.
206. Jump up^ Jim Vejvoda (August 4, 2013). "Footage From the Unproduced Legend of Zelda CG-Animated Movie". IGN. Retrieved August 5, 2013.
207. Jump up^ "You Might Need Your 3DS If There's Ever A Legend of Zelda Movie". Kotaku. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
208. Jump up^ "Nintendo wants to "change movies" with an interactive Zelda film". GamesIndustry. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
209. Jump up^ Whitehead, Thomas (August 3, 2014). "The Legend of Zelda Monopoly Dated for 15th September in US". Nintendo Life. Retrieved August 4, 2014.

