West Side Story
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about stage musical. For the film version, see West Side Story (film).
West Side Story
Original cast recordingMusicLeonard BernsteinLyricsStephen SondheimBookArthur LaurentsBasisRomeo and Juliet
by William ShakespeareProductions1957 Broadway
1958 West End
1959 US Tour
1960 Broadway return
1961 Film
1980 Broadway revival
1997 UK Tour and West End revival
2008 West End revival and UK Tour
2009 Broadway revival and US Tour
2013 UK TourWest Side Story is a musical with a book by Arthur Laurents, music by Leonard Bernstein, lyrics by Stephen Sondheimand conception and choreography by Jerome Robbins.[1] It was inspired by William Shakespeare's play Romeo and Juliet.
The story is set in the Upper West Side neighborhood in New York City in the mid-1950s, an ethnic, blue-collarneighborhood (in the early 1960s much of the neighborhood would be cleared in an urban renewal project for the Lincoln Center, changing the neighborhood's character).[2][3] The musical explores the rivalry between the Jets and the Sharks, two teenage street gangs of different ethnic backgrounds. The members of the Sharks, from Puerto Rico, are taunted by the Jets, a white gang.[4] The young protagonist, Tony, a former member of the Jets and best friend of the gang leader, Riff, falls in love with Maria, the sister of Bernardo, the leader of the Sharks. The dark theme, sophisticated music, extended dance scenes, and focus on social problems marked a turning point in American musical theatre. Bernstein's score for the musical includes "Something's Coming", "Maria", "America", "Somewhere", "Tonight", "Jet Song", "I Feel Pretty", "A Boy Like That", "One Hand, One Heart", "Gee, Officer Krupke", and "Cool".
The original 1957 Broadway production, directed and choreographed by Jerome Robbins and produced by Robert E. Griffith and Harold Prince, marked Sondheim's Broadway debut. It ran for 732 performances before going on tour. The production was nominated for six Tony Awards including Best Musical in 1957,[5] but the award for Best Musical went to Meredith Willson's The Music Man. Robbins won the Tony Award for his choreography and Oliver Smith won for his scenic designs. The show had an even longer-running London production, a number of revivals and international productions. A 1961 musical film of the same name, directed by Robert Wise and Robbins, starred Natalie Wood, Richard Beymer, Rita Moreno, George Chakiris and Russ Tamblyn. The film was nominated for eleven Academy Awards and won ten, including George Chakiris for Supporting Actor, Rita Moreno for Supporting Actress, and the Best Picture.
Contents
  [hide] 
* 1Background
o 1.1Genesis
o 1.2Collaboration and development
o 1.3Production period
* 2Synopsis
o 2.1Act 1
o 2.2Act 2
* 3Characters
* 4Principal cast
* 5Musical numbers
o 5.1Act 1
o 5.2Act 2
* 6Productions
o 6.1Original Broadway production
o 6.2UK productions
o 6.31980 Broadway revival
o 6.42009 Broadway revival
o 6.5Other notable US productions
o 6.6National tours
o 6.7International productions
* 7Critical reaction
* 8Score
* 9Recordings
* 10Film
* 11References in popular culture
* 12Awards and nominations
o 12.1Original Broadway production
o 12.21980 Broadway revival
o 12.32008 West End revival
o 12.42009 Broadway revival
* 13References
* 14Further reading
* 15External links
Background[edit]
Genesis[edit]
In 1947, Jerome Robbins approached Leonard Bernstein and Arthur Laurents about collaborating on a contemporary musical adaptation of Romeo and Juliet. He proposed that the plot focus on the conflict between an Irish Catholic family and a Jewish family living on the Lower East Side of Manhattan,[6] during the Easter–Passover season. The girl has survived the Holocaust and emigrated from Israel; the conflict was to be centered around anti-Semitism of the Catholic "Jets" towards the Jewish "Emeralds" (a name that made its way into the script as a reference).[7] Eager to write his first musical, Laurents immediately agreed. Bernstein wanted to present the material in operatic form, but Robbins and Laurents resisted the suggestion. They described the project as "lyric theater", and Laurents wrote a first draft he called East Side Story. Only after he completed it did the group realize it was little more than a musicalization of themes that had already been covered in plays like Abie's Irish Rose. When he opted to drop out, the three men went their separate ways, and the piece was shelved for almost five years.[8][9]
In 1955, theatrical producer Martin Gabel was working on a stage adaptation of the James M. Cain novel Serenade, about an opera singer who comes to the realization he is homosexual, and he invited Laurents to write the book. Laurents accepted and suggested Bernstein and Robbins join the creative team. Robbins felt if the three were going to join forces, they should return to East Side Story, and Bernstein agreed. Laurents, however, was committed to Gabel, who introduced him to the young composer/lyricist Stephen Sondheim. Sondheim auditioned by playing the score for Saturday Night, his musical that was scheduled to open in the fall. Laurents liked the lyrics but was not impressed with the music. Sondheim did not care for Laurents' opinion. Serenade ultimately was shelved.[10]
Laurents was soon hired to write the screenplay for a remake of the 1934 Greta Garbo film The Painted Veil for Ava Gardner. While in Hollywood, he contacted Bernstein, who was in town conducting at the Hollywood Bowl. The two met at The Beverly Hills Hotel, and the conversation turned to juvenile delinquent gangs, a fairly recent social phenomenon that had received major coverage on the front pages of the morning newspapers due to a Chicano turf war. Bernstein suggested they rework East Side Story and set it in Los Angeles, but Laurents felt he was more familiar with Puerto Ricans and Harlem than he was with Mexican Americansand Olvera Street. The two contacted Robbins, who was enthusiastic about a musical with a Latin beat. He arrived in Hollywood to choreograph the dance sequences for The King and I, and he and Laurents began developing the musical while working on their respective projects, keeping in touch with Bernstein, who had returned to New York. When the producer of The Painted Veil replaced Gardner with Eleanor Parker and asked Laurents to revise his script with her in mind, he backed out of the film, freeing him to devote all his time to the stage musical.[11]
Collaboration and development[edit]
In New York City, Laurents went to the opening night party for a new play by Ugo Betti, and there he met Sondheim, who had heard that East Side Story, now retitled West Side Story, was back on track. Bernstein had decided he needed to concentrate solely on the music, and he and Robbins had invited Betty Comdenand Adolph Green to write the lyrics, but the team opted to work on Peter Pan instead. Laurents asked Sondheim if he would be interested in tackling the task. Initially he resisted, because he was determined to write the full score for his next project (Saturday Night had been aborted), but Oscar Hammerstein convinced him that he would benefit from the experience, and he accepted.[12] Meanwhile, Laurents had written a new draft of the book changing the characters' backgrounds: Anton, once an Irish American, was now of Polish and Irish descent, and the formerly Jewish Maria had become a Puerto Rican.[13]
The original book Laurents wrote closely adhered to Romeo and Juliet, but the characters based on Rosaline and the parents of the doomed lovers were eliminated early on. Later the scenes related to Juliet's faking her death and committing suicide also were deleted. Language posed a problem; four-letter curse words were uncommon in the theater at the time, and slang expressions were avoided for fear they would be dated by the time the production opened. Laurents ultimately invented what sounded like real street talk but actually was not: "cut the frabba-jabba", for example.[14] Sondheim converted long passages of dialogue, and sometimes just a simple phrase like "A boy like that would kill your brother", into lyrics. With the help of Oscar Hammerstein, Laurents convinced Bernstein and Sondheim to move "One Hand, One Heart", which he considered too pristine for the balcony scene, to the scene set in the bridal shop, and as a result "Tonight" was written to replace it. Laurents felt that the building tension needed to be alleviated in order to increase the impact of the play's tragic outcome, so comic relief in the form of Officer Krupke was added to the second act. He was outvoted on other issues: he felt the lyrics to "America" and "I Feel Pretty" were too witty for the characters singing them, but they stayed in the score and proved to be audience favorites. Another song, "Kid Stuff", was added and quickly removed during the Washington, D.C. tryout when Laurents convinced the others it was helping tip the balance of the show into typical musical comedy.[15]
Bernstein composed West Side Story and Candide concurrently, which led to some switches of material between the two works.[16] Tony and Maria's duet, "One Hand, One Heart", was originally intended for Cunegonde in Candide. The music of "Gee, Officer Krupke" was pulled from the Venice scene in Candide.[17] Laurents explained the style that the creative team finally decided on:[18]
Just as Tony and Maria, our Romeo and Juliet, set themselves apart from the other kids by their love, so we have tried to set them even further apart by their language, their songs, their movement. Wherever possible in the show, we have tried to heighten emotion or to articulate inarticulate adolescence through music, song or dance.
The show was nearly complete in the fall of 1956, but almost everyone on the creative team needed to fulfill other commitments first. Robbins was involved with Bells Are Ringing, then Bernstein with Candide, and in January 1957 A Clearing in the Woods, Laurents' latest play, opened and quickly closed.[19] When a backers' audition failed to raise any money for West Side Story late in the spring of 1957, only two months before the show was to begin rehearsals, producer Cheryl Crawford pulled out of the project.[20] Every other producer had already turned down the show, deeming it too dark and depressing. Bernstein was despondent, but Sondheim convinced his friend Hal Prince, who was in Boston overseeing the out-of-town tryout of the new George Abbott musical New Girl in Town, to read the script. He liked it but decided to ask Abbott, his longtime mentor, for his opinion, and Abbott advised him to turn it down. Prince, aware that Abbott was the primary reason New Girl was in trouble, decided to ignore him, and he and his producing partner Robert Griffith flew to New York to hear the score.[21] In his memoirs, Prince recalled, "Sondheim and Bernstein sat at the piano playing through the music, and soon I was singing along with them."[17]
Production period[edit]
Prince began cutting the budget and raising money. Robbins then announced he did not want to choreograph the show, but changed his mind when Prince agreed to an eight-week dance rehearsal period (instead of the customary four), since there was to be more dancing in West Side Story than in any previous Broadway show,[17] and allowed Robbins to hire Peter Gennaro as his assistant.[22] Originally, when considering the cast, Laurents wanted James Dean for the lead role of Tony, but the actor had recently died. Sondheim found Larry Kert and Chita Rivera, who created the roles of Tony and Anita, respectively. Getting the work on stage was still not easy. Bernstein said:[23]
Everyone told us that [West Side Story] was an impossible project ... And we were told no one was going to be able to sing augmented fourths, as with "Ma-ri-a" ... Also, they said the score was too rangy for pop music ... Besides, who wanted to see a show in which the first-act curtain comes down on two dead bodies lying on the stage?... And then we had the really tough problem of casting it, because the characters had to be able not only to sing but dance and act and be taken for teenagers. Ultimately, some of the cast were teenagers, some were 21, some were 30 but looked 16. Some were wonderful singers but couldn't dance very well, or vice versa ... and if they could do both, they couldn't act.
Throughout the rehearsal period, the New York newspapers were filled with articles about gang warfare, keeping the show's plot timely. Robbins kept the cast members playing the Sharks and the Jets separate in order to discourage them from socializing with each other and reminded everyone of the reality of gang violence by posting news stories on the bulletin board backstage.[24] Robbins wanted a gritty realism from his sneaker- and jeans-clad cast. He gave the ensemble more freedom than Broadway dancers had previously been given to interpret their roles, and the dancers were thrilled to be treated like actors instead of just choreographed bodies.[25] As the rehearsals wore on, Bernstein fought to keep his score together, as other members of the team called on him to cut out more and more of the sweeping or complex "operatic" passages.[17] Columbia Records initially declined to record the cast album, saying the score was too depressing and too difficult.[7]
There were problems with Oliver Smith's designs. His painted backdrops were stunning, but the sets were, for the most part, either shabby looking or too stylized. Prince refused to spend money on new construction, and Smith was obliged to improve what he had as best he could with very little money to do it.[26]
The pre-Broadway run in Washington, D.C. was a critical and commercial success, although none of the reviews mentioned Sondheim, listed as co-lyricist, who was overshadowed by the better-known Bernstein. Bernstein magnanimously removed his name as co-author of the lyrics, although Sondheim was uncertain he wanted to receive sole credit for what he considered to be overly florid contributions by Bernstein. Robbins demanded and received a "Conceived by" credit, and used it to justify his making major decisions regarding changes in the show without consulting the others. As a result, by opening night on Broadway, none of his collaborators were talking to him.[27]
It has been rumored that while Bernstein was off trying to fix the musical Candide, Sondheim wrote some of the music for West Side Story, and that Bernstein's co-lyricist billing mysteriously disappeared from the credits of West Side Story during the tryout, presumably as a trade-off.[28] However, Suskin states in Show Tunesthat "As the writing progressed and the extent of Bernstein's lyric contributions became less, the composer agreed to rescind his credit...Contrary to rumor, Sondheim did not write music for the show; his only contribution came on "Something's Coming", where he developed the main strain of the chorus from music Bernstein wrote for the verse.[29])
Synopsis[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Act 1[edit]
Two rival teenage gangs, the Jets (White) and the Sharks (Puerto Rican), struggle for control of the neighborhood somewhere in the Upper West Side of New York City amidst the police (Prologue). They are warned by Lt. Schrank and Officer Krupke to stop fighting on their beat. The police chase the Sharks off, and then the Jets plan how they can assure their continued dominance of the street. The Jets' leader, Riff, suggests setting up a rumble with the Sharks. He plans to make the challenge to Bernardo, the Sharks' leader, that night at the neighborhood dance. Riff wants to convince his friend and former member of the Jets, Tony, to meet the Jets at the dance. Some of the Jets are unsure of his loyalty, but Riff is adamant that Tony is still one of them ("Jet Song"). Riff meets Tony while he's working at Doc's Drugstore to persuade him to come. Tony initially refuses, but Riff wins him over. Tony is convinced that something important is round the corner ("Something's Coming").
Maria works in a bridal shop with Anita, the girlfriend of her brother, Bernardo. Maria has just arrived from Puerto Rico for her arranged marriage to Chino, a friend of Bernardo's. Maria confesses to Anita that she is not in love with Chino. Anita makes Maria a dress to wear to the neighborhood dance.

The Shark girls extol the virtues of "America" in Portland Center Stage's production of West Side Story in 2007.
At the dance, after introductions, the teenagers begin to dance; soon a challenge dance is called ("Dance at the Gym"), during which Tony and Maria (who aren't taking part in the challenge dance) see each other across the room and are drawn to each other. They dance together, forgetting the tension in the room, and fall in love, but Bernardo pulls his sister from Tony and sends her home. Riff and Bernardo agree to meet for a War Council at Doc's, a drug store which is considered neutral ground, but meanwhile, an infatuated and happy Tony finds Maria's building and serenades her outside her bedroom ("Maria"). She appears on her fire escape, and the two profess their love for one another ("Tonight"). Meanwhile, Anita, Rosalia, and the other Shark girls discuss the differences between the territory of Puerto Rico and the mainland United States of America, with Anita defending America, and Rosalia yearning for Puerto Rico ("America").
The Jets get antsy while waiting for the Sharks inside Doc's Drug Store. Riff helps them let out their aggression ("Cool"). The Sharks arrive to discuss weapons to use in the rumble. Tony suggests "a fair fight" (fists only), which the leaders agree to, despite the other members' protests. Bernardo believes that he will fight Tony, but must settle for fighting Diesel, Riff's second-in-command, instead. This is followed by a monologue by the ineffective Lt. Schrank trying to find out the location of the rumble. Tony tells Doc about Maria. Doc is worried for them while Tony is convinced that nothing can go wrong; he is in love.

Tony stabs Bernardo in the 1957 Broadway production.
The next day, Maria is in a very happy mood at the bridal shop, as she anticipates seeing Tony again. However, she learns about the upcoming rumble from Anita and is dismayed. When Tony arrives, Maria asks him to stop the fight altogether, which he agrees to do. Before he goes, they dream of their wedding ("One Hand, One Heart"). Tony, Maria, Anita, Bernardo and the Sharks, and Riff and the Jets all anticipate the events to come that night ("Tonight Quintet"). The gangs meet under the highway and, as the fight between Bernardo and Diesel begins, Tony arrives and tries to stop it. Though Bernardo taunts Tony, ridiculing his attempt to make peace and provoking him in every way, Tony keeps his composure. When Bernardo pushes Tony, Riff punches him in Tony's defense. The two draw their switchblades and get in a fight ("The Rumble"). Tony attempts to intervene, inadvertently leading to Riff being fatally stabbed by Bernardo. Tony kills Bernardo in a fit of rage, which in turn provokes an all-out fight like the fight in the Prologue. The sound of approaching police sirens is heard, and everyone scatters, except Tony, who stands in shock at what he has done. The tomboy, Anybody's, who stubbornly wishes that she could become a Jet, tells Tony to flee from the scene at the last moment and flees with the knives. Only the bodies of Riff and Bernardo remain.
Act 2[edit]

Tony (Justin Gordon) and Maria (Erica Racz) in a Pacific Repertory Theatre production in 2001.
Blissfully unaware of the gangs' plans for that night, Maria daydreams about seeing Tony with her friends—Rosalia, Consuelo, Teresita and Francisca ("I Feel Pretty"). Later, as Maria dances on the roof happily because she has seen Tony and believes he went to stop the rumble, Chino brings the news that Tony has killed Bernardo. Maria flees to her bedroom, praying that Chino is lying. Tony arrives to see Maria and she initially pounds on his chest with rage, but she still loves him. They plan to run away together. As the walls of Maria's bedroom disappear, they find themselves in a dreamlike world of peace ("Somewhere").
Two of the Jets, A-Rab and Baby John, are set on by Officer Krupke, but they manage to escape him. They meet the rest of the gang. To cheer themselves up, they lampoon Officer Krupke, and the other adults who don't understand them, ("Gee Officer Krupke"). Anybody's arrives and tells the Jets she has been spying on the Puerto Ricans; she has discovered that Chino is looking for Tony with a gun. The gang separates to find Tony. Action accepts Anybody's into the Jets, and includes her in the search.
A grieving Anita arrives at Maria's apartment. As Tony leaves, he tells Maria to meet him at Doc's so they can run away to the country. In spite of her attempts to conceal it, Anita sees that Tony has been with Maria, and launches an angry tirade against him, ("A Boy Like That"). Maria counters by telling Anita how powerful love is, ("I Have a Love"), though, and Anita realizes that Maria loves Tony as much as she had loved Bernardo. She admits that Chino has a gun and is looking for Tony.
Lt. Schrank arrives to question Maria about her brother's death, and Anita agrees to go to Doc's to tell Tony to wait. Unfortunately, the Jets, including Anybody's, who have found Tony, have congregated at Doc's, and they taunt Anita with racist slurs and eventually simulate rape. Doc arrives and stops them. Anita is furious, and in anger spitefully delivers the wrong message, telling the Jets that Chino has shot Maria dead.
Doc relates the news to Tony, who has been dreaming of heading to the countryside to have children with Maria. Feeling there is no longer anything to live for, Tony leaves to find Chino, begging for him to shoot him as well. Just as Tony sees Maria alive, Chino arrives and shoots Tony. The Jets, Sharks, and adults flock around the lovers. Maria holds Tony in her arms (and sings a quiet, brief reprise of "Somewhere") as he dies. Angry at the death of another friend, the Jets move towards the Sharks but Maria takes Chino's gun and tells everyone that "all of [them]" killed Tony and the others because of their hate for each other, and, "Now I can kill too, because now I have hate!" she yells. However, she is unable to bring herself to fire the gun and drops it, crying in grief. Gradually, all the members of both gangs assemble on either side of Tony's body, showing that the feud is over. The Jets and Sharks form a procession, and together carry Tony away, with Maria the last one in the procession.
Characters[edit]
The Jets
* Riff, the leader
* Tony, his friend, who falls in love with Maria
* Action, A-Rab, Baby John, Big Deal, Diesel, Gee-Tar, Mouthpiece, Snowboy, Tiger and Anybodys
The Jets' Girls
* Graziella, Velma, Minnie, Clarice and Pauline
The Sharks
* Bernardo, the leader
* Chino, his friend
* Pepe, Indio, Luis, Anxious, Nibbles, Juano, Toro and Moose
The Sharks' Girls
* Maria, Bernardo's sister, who falls in love with Tony
* Anita, Bernardo's girl
* Rosalia, Consuelo, Teresita, Francisca, Estella and Marguerita
The Adults
* Doc, Schrank, Krupke and Glad Hand
* Principal cast[edit]
CharactersOriginal Broadway Cast (1957)West End (1958)1980 Broadway Revival2009 Broadway RevivalTonyLarry KertDon McKayKen MarshallMatt CavenaughMariaCarol LawrenceMarlys WattersJosie de GuzmanJosefina ScaglioneRiffMichael CallanGeorge ChakirisJames J. MellonCody GreenBernardoKen LeRoyHéctor Jaime MercadoGeorge AkramAnitaChita RiveraDebbie AllenKaren OlivoMusical numbers[edit]
Act 1[edit]
* "Prologue" – Orchestra, danced by Jets & Sharks
* "Jet Song" – Riff & Jets
* "Something's Coming" – Tony
* "The Dance at the Gym" – Jets & Sharks
* "Maria" – Tony
* "Tonight" – Tony & Maria
* "America" – Anita, Rosalia, & Shark Girls
* "Cool" – Riff & Jets
* "One Hand, One Heart" – Tony & Maria
* "Tonight (Quintet & Chorus)" – Company
* "The Rumble" – Orchestra, danced by Riff, Bernardo, Jets, & SharksAct 2[edit]
* "I Feel Pretty" – Maria, Rosalia, Estella, & Consuelo
* "Somewhere" – Consuelo, danced by Company
* "Gee, Officer Krupke" – Action, Snowboy & Jets
* "A Boy Like That" – Anita & Maria
* "I Have a Love" – Anita & Maria
* "Taunting" – Anita & Jets
* "Finale" – CompanyNotes
* In the 1964 and 1980 revivals, "Somewhere" was sung by Francisca rather than Consuelo.
* In the 2009 revival, "Cool" was performed by Riff, the Jets, and the Jet Girls. "I Feel Pretty" was sung in Spanish as "Siento Hermosa" and "A Boy Like That" was sung in Spanish as "Un Hombre Así". "Somewhere" was sung by Kiddo, a young Jet.
Productions[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Original Broadway production[edit]
After tryouts in Washington, D.C. and Philadelphia beginning in August 1957, the original Broadway production opened at the Winter Garden Theatre on September 26, 1957 to positive reviews. The production was directed and choreographed by Jerome Robbins, produced by Robert E. Griffith and Harold Prince and starred Larry Kert as Tony, Carol Lawrence as Maria, Chita Rivera as Anita and David Winters as Baby John, the youngest of the gang members. Robbins won the Tony Award for Best Choreographer, and Oliver Smith won the Tony for Best Scenic Designer. Also nominated were Carol Lawrence, as Best Actress in a Supporting Role in a Musical, Max Goberman as Best Musical Director and Conductor, and Irene Sharaff for Best Costume Design. Carol Lawrence received the 1958 Theatre World Award. Lighting was designed by Jean Rosenthal. The production ran for 732 performances at the Winter Garden Theatre before touring and then returning to the Winter Garden Theatre in 1960 for another 253 performance engagement.
The other notable cast members in the original production were: Riff: Michael Callan, A-Rab: Tony Mordente, Big Deal: Martin Charnin, Gee-Tar: Tommy Abbott, Chino: Jamie Sanchez, Rosalia: Marilyn Cooper, Consuelo: Reri Grist and Doc: Art Smith.
Several dances from West Side Story were included in the Tony Award-winning 1989 Broadway production, Jerome Robbins' Broadway.
UK productions[edit]
The 1958 European premiere at the Manchester Opera House transferred to London, where it opened at Her Majesty's Theatre in the West End on December 12, 1958 and ran until June 1961 with a total of 1,039 performances. Robbins directed and choreographed, and it was co-choreographed by Peter Gennaro, with scenery by Oliver Smith. Featured performers were George Chakiris, who won an Academy Award as Bernardo in the 1961 film version, as Riff, Marlys Watters as Maria, Don McKay as Tony, and Chita Rivera reprising her Broadway role as Anita.[30] David Holliday, who had been playing Gladhand since the London opening, took over as Tony.
A UK national tour started in 1997 and starred David Habbin as Tony, Katie Knight Adams as Maria and Anna-Jane Casey as Anita. The production transferred to London's West End opening at the Prince Edward Theatre in October 1998, transferring to the Prince of Wales Theatre where it closed in January 2000. The production subsequently toured the UK for a second time.[31]
1980 Broadway revival[edit]
A Broadway revival opened at the Minskoff Theatre on February 14, 1980 and closed on November 30, 1980, after 333 performances. It was directed and choreographed by Robbins, with the book scenes co-directed by Gerald Freedman; produced by Gladys Nederlander and Tom Abbott and Lee Becker Theodore assisted the choreography reproduction.[32] The original scenic, lighting, and costume designs were used. It starred Ken Marshall as Tony, Josie de Guzman as Maria and Debbie Allen as Anita. Both de Guzman and Allen received Tony Award nominations as Best Featured Actress in a Musical, and the musical was nominated as Best Reproduction (Play or Musical). Allen won the Drama Desk Award as Outstanding Featured Actress in a Musical. Other notable cast members in the revival included Brent Barrett as Diesel, Harolyn Blackwell as Francisca, Stephen Bogardus as Mouth Piece and Reed Jones as Big Deal
The Minskoff production subsequently opened the Nervi Festival in Genoa, Italy in July 1981 with Josie de Guzman as Maria and Brent Barrett as Tony.[33]
2009 Broadway revival[edit]
In 2007, Arthur Laurents stated, "I've come up with a way of doing [West Side Story] that will make it absolutely contemporary without changing a word or a note."[34]He directed a pre-Broadway production of West Side Story at the National Theatre in Washington, D.C. that ran from December 15, 2008 through January 17, 2009. The Broadway revival began previews at the Palace Theatre on February 23, 2009 and opened on March 19, 2009.[35][36] The production wove Spanish lyrics and dialogue into the English libretto. The translations are by Tony Award winner Lin-Manuel Miranda. Laurents stated, "The musical theatre and cultural conventions of 1957 made it next to impossible for the characters to have authenticity. Every member of both gangs was always a potential killer even then. Now they actually will be. Only Tony and Maria try to live in a different world".[37][38][39] In August 2009, some of the lyrics for "A Boy Like That" ("Un Hombre Asi") and "I Feel Pretty" ("Me Siento Hermosa"), which were previously sung in Spanish in the revival, were changed back to the original English.[40] However, the Spanish lyrics sung by the Sharks in the "Tonight" (Quintet) remained in Spanish.[citation needed]
The cast featured Matt Cavenaugh as Tony, Josefina Scaglione as Maria and Karen Olivo as Anita.[41] Olivo won the Tony Award for Best Featured Actress, while Scaglione was nominated for the award for Leading Actress.[42][43] The cast recording won the Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album.[44] In July 2010, the producers reduced the size of the orchestra, replacing five musicians with an off-stage synthesizer.[45] The production closed on January 2, 2011 after 748 performances and 27 previews.[46] The revival sold 1,074,462 tickets on Broadway over the course of nearly two years.[47]
Other notable US productions[edit]
The New York City Center Light Opera Company production played for a four-week limited engagement of 31 performances in 1964. Tony was Don McKay, Maria was Julia Migenes and Anita was played by Luba Lisa. It was staged by Gerald Freedman based on Robbins' original concept, and the choreography was re-mounted by Tom Abbott.[citation needed]
The Musical Theater of Lincoln Center and Richard Rodgers production opened at the New York State Theater, Lincoln Center, in June 1968 and closed in September 1968 after 89 performances. Direction and choreography were reproduced by Lee Theodore, and scenery was by Oliver Smith. Tony was Kurt Peterson and Maria was Victoria Mallory.[citation needed]
The musical has also been adapted to be performed as Deaf Side Story using both English and American Sign Language, with deaf Sharks and hearing Jets.[48]
National tours[edit]
A 1959 national tour was launched on July 1, 1959. The show played in Denver, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, Detroit, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Boston. This tour returned to the Winter Garden Theater in New York on April 27, 1960 and closed on December 10 of that year.
A 1987 U.S. tour starred Jack Wagner as Tony, with Valarie Pettiford as Anita and was directed by Alan Johnson.[49] A bus and truck (non-Equity) tour was produced in 1998 by City Vision Theatricals.[citation needed] A national tour, directed by Alan Johnson, was produced in 2002.[50]
A national tour of the 2009 Broadway revival began in October 2010 at the Fisher Theatre in Detroit, Michigan.[51] The cast features Kyle Harris as Tony, Ali Ewoldt as Maria and Eric Hoffmann as Officer Krupke.[52] After a very successful year, the tour was sent out for another year.[53][54] A Non-equity tour version of the 2009 Revival, presented by Troika Entertainment, began in fall 2012.[55]
International productions[edit]
In 1961, a tour of Israel, Africa and the Near East was mounted. In February 1962, the West End (H. M. Tennent) production launched a five-month Scandinavian tour opening in Copenhagen, continuing to Oslo, Gothenburg, Stockholm and Helsinki. Robert Jeffrey took over from David Holliday as Tony and Jill Martin played Maria. In 1977, "Amor Sin Barreras" was produced in Mexico City by Alfonso Rosas Prigo, & Ruben Boido, Direction by Ruben Boido, presented at the Hidalgo Theater. Gualberto Castro played the part of Tony; Maria Medina was Maria, among other cast members was Macaria. From 1982–1984 a tour of South America, Israel and Europe was mounted with talent from New York. The Director/Choreographers for that production were Jay Norman and Lee Theodore, veterans of the original Broadway cast. The Japanese Takarazuka Revue has performed the show twice. It was produced by the Moon Troupe in 1998 and again in 1999 by the Star Troupe. A Hong Kong production was produced in 2000 with Cantonese lyrics, featuring Hong Kong rock star Paul Wong as Tony. It was staged at the outdoor plaza of Hong Kong Cultural Centre. Canada's Stratford Shakespeare Festival performed West Side Story in 1999, starring Tyley Ross as Tony and Ma-Anne Dionisio as Maria, and again in 2009,[56]
The Austrian Bregenz Festival presented West Side Story in a German translation by Marcel Prawy in 2003 and 2004, directed by the Francesca Zambello, followed by a German tour.[57] A French language adaptation, translated by Philippe Gobeille, opened in Montreal, Quebec in March 2008.[58] A Philippine version played in 2008 at the Meralco Theatre. It featured Christian Bautista as Tony, Karylle and Joanna Ampil as Maria.[59] Also in 2008, an adaptation played in Portugal, directed by Filipe La Féria, with the name West Side Story – Amor Sem Barreiras, in the Politeama Theater, in Lisbon, with Ricardo Soler as Tony and Lúcia Moniz and Anabela splitting the role of Anita.[citation needed]
An international tour (2005–2010), directed and choreographed by Joey McKneely played in Tokyo, Paris, Austria, Switzerland, Germany, Singapore, São Paulo, France, Taiwan, China, Italy, Rotterdam and Madrid.[60][61] In 2011, a Lima production was produced by "Preludio Asociación Cultural" with Marco Zunino as Tony, Rossana Fernández-Maldonado as Maria, Jesús Neyra as Bernardo, Tati Alcántara as Anita and Joaquín de Orbegoso as Riff.[62]
Critical reaction[edit]
The creators' innovations in dance, music and theatrical style resulted in strong reactions from the critics. Walter Kerr wrote in the New York Herald Tribune on September 27, 1957:[63]
The radioactive fallout from West Side Story must still be descending on Broadway this morning. Director, choreographer, and idea-man Jerome Robbins has put together, and then blasted apart, the most savage, restless, electrifying dance patterns we've been exposed to in a dozen seasons .... the show rides with a catastrophic roar over the spider-web fire-escapes, the shadowed trestles, and the plain dirt battlegrounds of a big city feud ... there is fresh excitement in the next debacle, and the next. When a gang leader advises his cohorts to play it "Cool", the intolerable tension between an effort at control and the instinctive drives of these potential killers is stingingly graphic. When the knives come out, and bodies begin to fly wildly through space under buttermilk clouds, the sheer visual excitement is breathtaking .... Mr. Bernstein has permitted himself a few moments of graceful, lingering melody: in a yearning "Maria", in the hushed falling line of "Tonight", in the wistful declaration of "I Have a Love". But for the most part he has served the needs of the onstage threshing machine ... When hero Larry Kert is stomping out the visionary insistence of "Something's Coming" both music and tumultuous story are given their due. Otherwise it's the danced narrative that takes urgent precedence ...
The other reviews generally joined in speculation about how the new work would influence the course of musical theater. Typical was John Chapman's review in the New York Daily News on September 27, 1957, headed: "West Side Story a Splendid and Super-Modern Musical Drama".
The American theatre took a venturesome forward step when the firm of Griffith & Prince presented West Side Story at the Winter Garden last evening. This is a bold new kind of musical theatre – a juke-box Manhattan opera. It is, to me, extraordinarily exciting .... the manner of telling the story is a provocative and artful blend of music, dance and plot – and the music and the dancing are superb. In [the score], there is the drive, the bounce, the restlessness and the sweetness of our town. It takes up the American musical idiom where it was left when George Gershwin died. It is fascinatingly tricky and melodically beguiling, and it marks the progression of an admirable composer ...
Time magazine found the dance and gang warfare more compelling than the love story and noted that the show's "putting choreography foremost, may prove a milestone in musical-drama history ..."[64][65]
While critics speculated about the comic-tragic darkness of the musical, audiences were captivated. The story appealed to society's undercurrent of rebellion from authority that surfaced in 1950s films like Rebel without a Cause. West Side Story took this one step further by combining the classic and the hip. Robbins' energetic choreography and Bernstein's grand score accentuated the satiric, hard-edged lyrics of Sondheim, and Laurents' capture of the angry voice of urban youth. The play was criticized for glamorizing gangs, and its portrayal of Puerto Ricans and lack of authentic Latin casting were weaknesses. Yet, the song "America" shows the triumph of the spirit over the obstacles often faced by immigrants. The musical also made points in its description of troubled youth and the devastating effects of poverty and racism. Juvenile delinquency is seen as an ailment of society: "No one wants a fella with a social disease!" One writer summed up the reasons for the show's popularity in these terms: "On the cusp of the 1960s, American society, still recovering from the enormous upheaval of World War II, was seeking stability and control."
Score[edit]
The score for West Side Story was orchestrated by Sid Ramin and Irwin Kostal following detailed instructions from Bernstein, who then wrote revisions on their manuscript (the original, heavily annotated by Ramin, Kostal and Bernstein himself is in the Rare Books and Manuscripts Library at Columbia University).[66] Ramin, Kostal, and Bernstein are billed as orchestrators for the show. The orchestra consisted of 31 players: a large Broadway pit orchestra enhanced to include 5 percussionists, a guitarist and a piano/celesta player.[67]
In 1961, Bernstein prepared a suite of orchestral music from the show, titled Symphonic Dances from West Side Story:
* Prologue (Allegro Moderato)
* "Somewhere" (Adagio)
* Scherzo (Vivace e Leggiero)
* Mambo (Meno Presto)
* Cha-Cha (Andantino Con Grazia)
* Meeting Scene (Meno Mosso)
* "Cool", Fugue (Allegretto)
* Rumble (Molto Allegro)
* Finale (Adagio)
Recordings[edit]
Recordings of West Side Story include the following:
* The 1957 original Broadway cast album, with Carol Lawrence as Maria, Larry Kert as Tony and Chita Rivera as Anita.
* A 1959 recording by the pianist André Previn comprised jazz versions of eight songs from the musical.
* The movie soundtrack, with Marni Nixon singing Maria's role (played in the film by Natalie Wood) and Tony (played in the film by Richard Beymer) sung by Jimmy Bryant. It won the Grammy Award for Best Sound Track Album or Recording of Original Cast from Motion Picture or Television. The 1992 remastered re-release of this album included the "Overture", the "End Credits" music, the complete "Dance at the Gym" and dialogue from the film. The 2004 re-release added the "Intermission" music.
* In 1961, Cal Tjader released a jazz version, arranged by Clare Fischer, on Fantasy Records. The album was released again in 2002 as Cal Tjader Plays Harold Arlen & West Side Story (double CD).
* In 1961, Stan Kenton recorded Kenton's West Side Story (a jazz version) that received a 1962 Grammy Award for Best Jazz Performance – Large Group (Instrumental).
* In 1962, Oscar Peterson and his trio recorded a jazz version, West Side Story.
* In 1962, Dave Brubeck recorded jazz versions of selections from the film score on Music From West Side Story.
* In 1966, Buddy Rich and his big band performed an arrangement penned by Bill Reddie called West Side Story Medley for many years.
* In 1984, Bernstein re-recorded the musical, conducting his own music for the first time. Generally known as the "operatic version" of West Side Story, it stars Kiri Te Kanawa as Maria, José Carreras as Tony, Tatiana Troyanos as Anita, Kurt Ollmann as Riff, Louise Edeiken as Rosalia, and Marilyn Horne as the offstage voice who sings "Somewhere". It won a Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album in 1985. The recording process was filmed as a documentary "The Making of West Side Story", which was made by the BBC for Unitel, Produced by Humphrey Burton and Directed by Christopher Swann. The documentary won the Flaherty BAFTA for documentary direction, a Prix Italia and was nominated for a Prime Time Emmy. It is available on YouTube.
* A 1993 recording, the first recording to document the full score including the overture performed by Britain's National Symphony Orchestra using cast members of the 1992 Leicester Haymarket Theatre production.
* In 1996, RCA Victor released the tribute album The Songs of West Side Story featuring new versions of the songs from the musical sung by popular music stars, including: "The Jet Song" sung by Brian Setzer, "A Boy Like That" sung by Selena, "I feel Pretty" sung by Little Richard, two versions of "Somewhere" performed by Aretha Franklin and Phil Collins, "Tonight" sung by Wynonna Judd and Kenny Loggins, "America" sung by Patti LaBelle, Natalie Cole and Sheila E., "I Have a Love" sung by Trisha Yearwood and "Rumble" performed by Chick Corea Elektric Band and Steve Vai's Monsters. Proceeds from the sale of this album go to benefit the Leonard Bernstein Education Through The Arts Fund, the NARAS Foundation and The Leonard Bernstein Center at Nashville, Tennessee.
* In 2002, Naxos Records released a CD with the Nashville Symphony Orchestra playing the music with soloists Mike Eldred (Tony), Betsi Morrison (Maria), Marianne Cook (Anita), Robert Dean (Riff), Michael San Giovanni, Joanna Chozen, and Michelle Prentice.[68][69][70]
* A 2007 tribute album entitled A Place for Us marking the 50th anniversary of the show. The album features cover versions previously recorded and a new recording of "Tonight" by Kristin Chenoweth and Hugh Panaro.
* A 2007 recording was released by Decca Broadway in honor of West Side Story's 50th anniversary. This album stars Hayley Westenra as Maria and Vittorio Grigolo as Tony. The Bernstein Foundation in New York has authorized the recording.[71] It was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Show Album.
* Bernstein recorded the Symphonic Dances suite with the New York Philharmonic in 1961, and with the Los Angeles Philharmonic in 1983. The Symphonic Dances have entered the repertoire of many major world orchestras, most recently by the Simon Bolivar Youth Orchestra under Gustavo Dudamel. It has been recorded by many orchestras, including the San Francisco Symphony under the direction of Seiji Ozawa.
* The 2009 new Broadway cast album, with Josefina Scaglione as Maria, Matt Cavenaugh as Tony and Karen Olivo as Anita won the 2010 Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album.[44]
* A live, semi-staged 2013 recording by the San Francisco Symphony under Music Director Michael Tilson Thomas, featuring Cheyenne Jackson, Alexandra Silber and others, debuted at No.1 on the Billboard Classical Albums chart in May 2014. It was released in 2014 as a hybrid SACD on the SFS Media label, and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album.
Film[edit]
Main article: West Side Story (film)
On October 18, 1961, a film adaptation of the musical was released. It received praise from critics and the public, and became the second highest-grossing film of the year in the United States. The film won ten Academy Awards in its eleven nominated categories, including Best Picture and a special award for Robbins. The film holds the distinction of being the musical film with the most Academy Award wins (10 wins), including Best Picture. The soundtrack album made more money than any other album before it.[citation needed]
References in popular culture[edit]
In addition to Bernstein's own West Side Story Suite, the music from the musical has been adapted by The Buddy Rich Big Band, which arranged and recorded "West Side Story Medley" on the 1966 album Buddy Rich's Swingin' New Big Band.[citation needed] The Stan Kenton Orchestra recorded Johnny Richards' 1961 Kenton's West Side Story, an album of jazz orchestrations based on the Bernstein scores. It won the 1962 Grammy Award for Best Jazz Recording by a Large Group.[citation needed] The 1996 album The Songs of West Side Story included covers by such diverse artists as Selena ("A Boy Like That"), Little Richard ("I Feel Pretty"), Trisha Yearwood ("I Have a Love") and Salt-n-Pepa, Def Jef, Lisa Lopes, the Jerky Boys, and Paul Rodriguez all collaborating on "Gee, Officer Krupke", as well as Chick Corea Elektric Band collaborating with Steve Vai's Monsters on "Rumble".[citation needed]
The television show Curb Your Enthusiasm extensively referenced West Side Story in the season seven episode "Officer Krupke".[72] An episode of Welcome Back, Kotter, "Sweatside Story", parodies West Side Story when the Sweathogs engage in a rumble with students from rival New Utrecht High School.[citation needed] In the third season of the series Glee, three episodes feature characters auditioning, rehearsing and performing a school production of West Side Story. Songs from the musical are performed in episode 2 "I Am Unicorn",[73] episode 3 "Asian F"[citation needed] and episode 5 "The First Time"[citation needed] and also given digital releases.[74] The Animaniacs episode "West Side Pigeons" features a parody romance and rivalry that mirrors that of the Jets and the Sharks.[citation needed] In the Tom and Jerry Tales episode "The League of Cats", Tom's and Jerry's respective leagues act very similar to the Jets and the Sharks. They also perform a number similar to the "Jet Song".[citation needed]

Helena Mattsson and Mohombi in the 2002 Swedish cast of the adaptation Wild Side Story
In film, Pixar animator Aaron Hartline used the first meeting between Tony and Maria as inspiration for the moment when Ken meets Barbie in Toy Story 3.[75] In the 2013 movie Teen Beach Movie, two teens are trapped inside a movie called Wet Side Story, in which a group of surfers and a group of bikers are competing in a turf war.[citation needed] Bring It On: In It to Win It has a plot that parallels West Side Story, and makes the reference explicit to the point where the two rival cheerleadingsquads are named the Jets and the Sharks.[citation needed]
From 1973 to 2004, Wild Side Story, a camp parody musical, based loosely on West Side Story and adapting parts of the musical's music and lyrics, has been performed a total of more than 500 times in Miami Beach, Florida, Stockholm, Gran Canaria and Los Angeles. The show, which lampoons the musical's tragic love story, and also lip-synching and drag shows, was created and directed by Lars Jacob.[76]
Awards and nominations[edit]
Original Broadway production[edit]
YearAward ceremonyCategoryNomineeResult1958Theatre World AwardCarol LawrenceWonTony AwardBest MusicalNominatedBest Performance by an Actress in a Featured Role in a MusicalCarol LawrenceNominatedBest ChoreographyJerome RobbinsWonBest Scenic DesignOliver SmithWonBest Costume DesignIrene SharaffNominatedBest Conductor and Musical DirectorMax GobermanNominated1980 Broadway revival[edit]
YearAward ceremonyCategoryNomineeResult1980Drama Desk AwardOutstanding Featured Actress in a MusicalDebbie AllenWonTony AwardBest RevivalNominatedBest Performance by an Actress in a Featured Role in a MusicalJosie de GuzmanNominatedDebbie AllenNominated2008 West End revival[edit]
YearAward ceremonyCategoryNomineeResult2009Laurence Olivier AwardBest Musical RevivalNominatedBest Actress in a MusicalSofia EscobarNominated2009 Broadway revival[edit]
YearAward ceremonyCategoryNomineeResult2009Tony AwardBest Revival of a MusicalNominatedBest Performance by an Actress in a Lead Role in a MusicalJosefina ScaglioneNominatedBest Performance by an Actress in a Featured Role in a MusicalKaren OlivoWonBest Lighting DesignHowell BinkleyNominatedDrama Desk AwardOutstanding Revival of a MusicalNominatedOutstanding Featured Actress in a MusicalKaren OlivoNominatedGrammy AwardBest Musical Theater AlbumWonTheatre World AwardJosefina ScaglioneWonReferences[edit]
1. Jump up^ West Side Story, SondheimGuide.com, accessed October 15, 2016
2. Jump up^ Sarah Waxman. "The History of the Upper West Side", ny.com
3. Jump up^ "About Lincoln Center", City Realty.com, accessed October 15, 2016
4. Jump up^ "'West Side Story plot and production listing", guidetomusicaltheatre.com, accessed August 18, 2011
5. Jump up^ " West Side Story Broadway" IBDB.com, accessed October 15, 2016
6. Jump up^ Long, Robert Emmet. "West Side Story", Broadway, The Golden Years:Jerome Robbins and The Great Choreographer-Directors : 1940 to the present, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003, ISBN 0-8264-1462-1, p. 96
7. ^ Jump up to:a b Information from a Leonard Bernstein.com Archived March 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.‹The template Wayback is being considered for merging.› 
8. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 329–330.
9. Jump up^ "Excerpts from Bernstein's West Side Log, see 1949 and 1955", WestSideStory.com, originally published in 1957, accessed August 18, 2011
10. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, p. 334.
11. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 336–43.
12. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 346–47.
13. Jump up^ Gottlieb, Jack (Guide and Commentary). "'West Side Story' Fact Sheet", WestSideStory.com, 2001, accessed August 18, 2011
14. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, p. 349.
15. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 350–51.
16. Jump up^ Some of the music Bernstein wrote for West Side Story, but that was not used in the production, was later integrated into the Chichester Psalms.
17. ^ Jump up to:a b c d Burton, Humphrey. "Leonard Bernstein by Humphrey Burton, Chapter 26", WestSideStory.com, 1994, accessed August 18, 2011.
18. Jump up^ Laurents, Arthur (August 4, 1957). "The Growth of an Idea". New York Herald Tribune.
19. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 351–52.
20. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 326–28.
21. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, p. 354.
22. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 354–56.
23. Jump up^ Wenner, Jann S.; Levy, Joe (2007). "Leonard Bernstein". The Rolling Stone Interviews. New York: Back Bay Books. ISBN 0-316-00526-6.
24. Jump up^ Roberts, Terri (Winter 2003). "West Side Story: 'We were all very young'". The Sondheim Review. 9 (3).
25. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 357–58.
26. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 360–61.
27. Jump up^ Laurents 2000, pp. 362–65.
28. Jump up^ Suskin, Steven (1990). Opening Night on Broadway: A Critical Quotebook of the Golden Era of the Musical Theatre. New York: Schirmer Books, p. 697. ISBN 0-02-872625-1.
29. Jump up^ Suskin, Steven (2010). Show Tunes: The Songs, Shows, and Careers of Broadway's Major Composers (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press US, p. 206. ISBN 0-19-531407-7.
30. Jump up^ "'West Side Story' London Production, 1958", Broadwayworld.com, accessed August 18, 2011
31. Jump up^ albemarle-london "Archive Page, 'West Side Story'", albemarle-london.com, accessed August 18, 2011
32. Jump up^ "West Side Story: Opening Night Production Credits". PlaybillVault. Playbill. Retrieved December 28, 2011.
33. Jump up^ Tedeschi, Rubens (9 July 1981). "Broadway s'addice ai «guerrieri della notte»", l'Unità. Retrieved 26 April 2014 (Italian).
34. Jump up^ Riedel, Michael. "Director's Cut – At 90, Playwright Still Vibrant, Vicious", New York Post, July 27, 2007, p.55
35. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew. "Laurents-Directed 'West Side Story' Sets Broadway Preview Date", Playbill.com, May 23, 2008
36. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew and Jones, Kenneth. "'West Side Story' Revival, Directed by Laurents, Sets Broadway Opening Date", Playbill.com, August 8, 2008
37. Jump up^ Jones, Kenneth. "West Side Story, This Time with Bilingual Approach", Playbill.com, July 16, 2008
38. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew and Jones, Kenneth. "Broadway-Bound 'West Side Story' Revival Launches", Playbill.com, December 15, 2008
39. Jump up^ Marks, Peter (December 14, 2008). "The Director's Route Back To 'West Side'". The Washington Post.
40. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew. "A Song Like That: Collaborators Reconsider Spanish Lyrics in 'West Side Story'", Playbill.com, August 25, 2009
41. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew. "Cavenaugh, Scaglione, Olivo, Green and Akram to Lead Cast of 'West Side Story' Revival", Playbill.com, October 28, 2008
42. Jump up^ Jones, Kenneth. "Billy Elliot, Norman Conquests, Hair, God of Carnage Are Tony Award Winners", Playbill.com, June 8, 2009
43. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew and Jones, Kenneth. "Nominations for 2009 Tony Awards Announced; Billy Elliot Earns 15 Nominations", Playbill.com, May 5, 2009
44. ^ Jump up to:a b Jones, Kenneth. " 'West Side Story' Cast Album Wins Grammy Award", Playbill.com, January 31, 2010
45. Jump up^ Woodiel, Paul (July 10, 2010). "Gee, Officer Krupke, I Need Those Violins". The New York Times. Retrieved December 17, 2010.
46. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew. Broadway "Revival of 'West Side Story' to Close in January; Olivo Will Not Return", Playbill.com, September 15, 2010
47. Jump up^ "Cumulative Broadway Grosses by Show", Broadwayworld.com, accessed August 18, 2011
48. Jump up^ Mark Rigney. Deaf Side Story: Deaf Sharks, Hearing Jets, and a Classic American Musical. Book description
49. Jump up^ Frank, Leah (August 30, 1987). "Theater Review; 'West Side Story': Staging At Its Best". The New York Times.
50. Jump up^ Information from the WestSideStory.com "2002 West Side Story tour archives", Westsidestory.com
51. Jump up^ Gans, Andrew. " 'West Side Story' National Tour to Launch in October", Playbill, February 5, 2010
52. Jump up^ "Grammy Award-Winning Smash Hit 'West Side Story' Launches National Tour at Detroit's Fisher Theatre", broadwayindetroit.com, September 16, 2010, accessed August 18, 2011
53. Jump up^ "Ross Lekites, Evy Ortiz Join Cast of WEST SIDE STORY National Tour". Broadwayworld.com. October 3, 2011. Retrieved February 4, 2012.
54. Jump up^ "Photo Flash: New Cast Joins WEST SIDE STORY National Tour!". Broadwayworld.com. October 28, 2011. Retrieved February 4, 2012.
55. Jump up^ "Troika Entertainment Launches National Tour of WEST SIDE STORY at Paramount Arts Center". broadwayworld.com. Retrieved May 15, 2014.
56. Jump up^ Ouzounian, Richard (June 8, 2009). "This Story achieves greatness". The Star. Toronto.
57. Jump up^ "'West Side Story' News, Bregenz Festival", westsidestory.com, accessed August 18, 2011
58. Jump up^ Information about the translation (in French only) westsidestory08.com, Archived September 26, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.‹The template Wayback is being considered for merging.› 
59. Jump up^ "'West Side Story' at the Meralco Theater this September", Thefilipinoweb, July 2, 2008, accessed August 18, 2011
60. Jump up^ Lash, Larry (November 12, 2007). "West Side Story". Variety. Retrieved August 17, 2008.
61. Jump up^ Loveridge, Lizzie. " 'West Side Story' 50th Anniversary Production", Curtain Up, August 1, 2008, accessed August 17, 2008
62. Jump up^ Marco Zunino y Rossana Fernández Maldonado protagonizan Amor sin barreras La República Perú, accessed June 1, 2011
63. Jump up^ Kerr, Walter (September 27, 1957). "'West Side Story'". New York Herald Tribune.
64. Jump up^ "Theater: New Musical in Manhattan ('West Side Story')", Time Magazine, October 7, 1957
65. Jump up^ Gianoulis, Tina (January 29, 2002). "'West Side Story'". St. James Encyclopedia of Pop Culture. Retrieved August 19, 2011.
66. Jump up^ See Simeone, Nigel (2009) "Leonard Bernstein: West Side Story", pp. 85–92: 'Sid Ramin and Irwin Kostal: Orchestrating the Show'
67. Jump up^ Simeone, Nigel (2009). Leonard Bernstein, West Side Story. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 0754664848.
68. Jump up^ http://www.arkivmusic.com/classical/Name/Joanna-Chozen/Performer/98338-2
69. Jump up^ http://www.musicweb-international.com/film/2003/Jan03/west_side_story.html
70. Jump up^ http://www.allmusic.com/album/leonard-bernstein-west-side-story-the-original-score-mw0000631082/credits
71. Jump up^ Album reviews, Manchester Evening News, 2007-08-06, accessed August 13, 2007
72. Jump up^ "'Curb Your Enthusiasm', Season 7, Episode 68, 'Officer Krupke'", HBO.com, accessed August 19, 2011
73. Jump up^ Futterman, Erica. "Glee Recap: West Side Story Auditions and the Return of Shelby Corcoran", Rolling Stone, September 28, 2011, accessed October 4, 2016
74. Jump up^ Cerasaro, Pat. "World Premiere Exclusive: Glee Takes On West Side Story's'Something's Coming' With Darren Criss", BroadwayWorld.com, September 26, 2011, accessed October 4, 2016
75. Jump up^ Hartline, Aaron. "Ken meets Barbie – A Toy Side Story", aaronhartline.blogspot.com (blog), accessed August 19, 2011
76. Jump up^ Ekemar, Kim. Wild Side Story at Showcase Alexandra's Stockholm, theatre playbill, January 6, 1976, p. 8; Stevens, Rob. Data Boy Pacific Southwest, West Hollywood, California, October 26, 1979, p. 76; Kearns, Michael. San Diego Update (L.A. Life section), November 30, 1979, p. 13; Norlén, Eva. Aftonbladet, July 21, 1997, p. 37; Island Connections, Los Cristianos, April 7, 2000, p. 2; MetroStockholm, August 2, 2013, p. 18; and Aftonbladet/Nöjesbladet, August 2, 2013, p. 25

